Part VIII Joining and Assembly Processes Fundamentals of Welding Chapter Contents 28.1 Overview of Welding Technology 28.1.1 Types of Welding Processes 28.1.2 Welding as a Commercial Operation 28.2 The Weld Joint 28.2.1 Types of Joints 28.2.2 Types of Welds 28.3 Physics of Welding 28.3.1 Power Density 28.3.2 Heat Balance in Fusion Welding 28.4 Features of a Fusion-Welded Joint This part of the book considers processes used to join two or more parts into an assembled entity.These processes are labeled in the lower stem of Figure 1.5. The term joining is generally used for welding, brazing, soldering, and adhesive bonding, which form a permanent joint between the parts—a joint that cannot easily be separated.The term assembly usually refers to mechanical methods of fastening parts together. Mechanical assembly is covered in Chapter 31. Some of these methods allow for easy disassembly, while others do not. Brazing, soldering, and adhesive bonding are discussed in Chapter 30. Coverage of the joining and assembly processes begins with welding, addressed in this chapter and the following. Welding is a materials joining process in which two or more parts are coalesced at their contacting surfaces by a suitable application of heat and/or pressure. Many welding processes are accomplished by heat alone, with no pressure applied; others by a combination of heat and pressure; and still others by pressure alone, with no external heat supplied. In some welding processes a ﬁller material is added to facilitate coalescence.The assemblage of parts that are joined by welding is called a weldment. Welding is most commonly associated with metal parts, but the process is also used for joining plastics. Here, the discussion will focus on metals. Welding is a relatively new process (Historical Note 28.1). Its commercial and technological importance derives from the following: ➢ Welding provides a permanent joint. The welded parts become a single entity. ➢ The welded joint can be stronger than the parent materials if a ﬁller metal is used that has strength properties superior to those of the parents, and if proper welding techniques are used. ➢ Welding is usually the most economical way to join components in terms of material usage and fabrication costs. Alternative mechanical methods of assembly require more complex shape alterations (e.g., drilling of holes) and addition of fasteners (e.g., rivets or bolts). The resulting mechanical assembly is usually heavier than a corresponding weldment. ➢ Welding is not restricted to the factory environment. It can be accomplished “in the ﬁeld.” Although welding has the advantages indicated above, it also has certain limitations and drawbacks (or potential drawbacks): ➢ Most welding operations are performed manually and are expensive in terms of labor cost. Many welding operations are considered “skilled trades,” and the labor to perform these operations may be scarce. ➢ Most welding processes are inherently dangerous because they involve the use of high energy. ➢ Because welding accomplishes a permanent bond between the components, it does not allow for convenient disassembly. If the product must occasionally be disassembled (e.g., for repair or maintenance), then welding should not be used as the assembly method. ➢ The welded joint can suffer from certain quality defects that are difﬁcult to detect. The defects can reduce the strength of the joint. Historical Note 28.1 Origins of welding Although welding is considered a relatively new process as practiced today, its origins can be traced to ancient times. Around 1000 BCE, the Egyptians and others in the eastern Mediterranean area learned to accomplish forge welding (Section 29.5.2). It was a natural extension of hot forging, which they used to make weapons, tools, and other implements. Forge-welded articles of bronze have been recovered by archeologists from the pyramids of Egypt. From these early beginnings through the Middle Ages, the blacksmith trade developed the art of welding by hammering to a high level of maturity. Welded objects of iron and other metals dating from these times have been found in India and Europe. It was not until the 1800s that the technological foundations of modern welding were established. Two important discoveries were made, both attributed to English scientist Sir Humphrey Davy: (1) the electric arc, and (2) acetylene gas. Around 1801, Davy observed that an electric arc could be struck between two carbon electrodes. However, not until the mid-1800s, when the electric generator was invented, did electrical power become available in amounts sufﬁ cient to sustain arc welding. It was a Russian, Nikolai Benardos, working out of a laboratory in France, who was granted a series of patents for the carbon arc–welding process (one in England in 1885, and another in the United States in 1887). By the turn of the century, carbon arc welding had become a popular commercial process for joining metals. Benardos’ inventions seem to have been limited to carbon arc welding. In 1892, an American named Charles Cofﬁn was awarded a U.S. patent for developing an arc–welding process utilizing a metal electrode. The unique feature was that the electrode added ﬁ ller metal to the weld joint (the carbon arc process does not deposit ﬁller). The idea of coating the metal electrode (to shield the welding process from the atmosphere) was developed later, with enhancements to the metal arc–welding process being made in England and Sweden starting around 1900. Between 1885 and 1900, several forms of resistance welding were developed by Elihu Thompson. These included spot welding and seam welding, two joining methods widely used today in sheet metalworking. Although Davy discovered acetylene gas early in the 1800s, oxyfuel gas welding required the subsequent development of torches for combining acetylene and oxygen around 1900. During the 1890s, hydrogen and natural gas were mixed with oxygen for welding, but the oxyacetylene ﬂame achieved signiﬁ cantly higher temperatures. These three welding processes—arc welding, resistance welding, and oxyfuel gas welding— constitute by far the majority of welding operations performed today.  Overview of Welding Technology Welding involves localized coalescence or joining together of two metallic parts at their faying surfaces. The faying surfaces are the part surfaces in contact or close proximity that are to be joined. Welding is usually performed on parts made of the same metal, but some welding operations can be used to join dissimilar metals.  28.1.1  TYPES OF WELDING PROCESSES  Some 50 different types of welding operations have been cataloged by the American Welding Society. They use various types or combinations of energy to provide the required power.The welding processes can be divided into two major groups:(1) fusion welding and (2) solid-state welding. Fusion Welding Fusion-welding processes use heat to melt the base metals. In many fusion welding operations, a ﬁller metal is added to the molten pool to facilitate the process and provide bulk and strength to the welded joint.A fusion-welding operation in which no ﬁller metal is added is referred to as an autogenous weld. The fusion category includes the most widely used welding processes, which can be organized into the following general groups (initials in parentheses are designations of the American Welding Society): ➢ Arc welding (AW). Arc welding refers to a group of welding processes in which heating of the metals is accomplished by an electric arc, as shown in Figure 28.1. Some arc-welding operations also apply pressure during the process and most utilize a ﬁller metal. FIGURE 28.1 Basics of arc welding: (1) beforethe weld; (2) during theweld (the base metal ismelted and ﬁller metal is added to the molten pool); and (3) the completedweldment. There are many variations of thearc-welding process. ➢ Resistance welding (RW). Resistance welding achieves coalescence using heat from electrical resistance to the ﬂow of a current passing between the faying surfaces of two parts held together under pressure. ➢ Oxyfuel gas welding (OFW).These joining processes use an oxyfuel gas,such as a mixture of oxygen and acetylene, to produce a hot ﬂame for melting the base metal and ﬁller metal, if one is used. ➢ Other fusion-welding processes. Other welding processes that produce fusion of the metals joined include electron beam welding and laser beam welding. Certain arc and oxyfuel processes are also used for cutting metals (Sections 25.3.4 and 25.3.5). Solid-State Welding Solid-state welding refers to joining processes in which coalescence results from application of pressure alone or a combination of heat and pressure. If heat is used, the temperature in the process is below the melting point of the metals being welded. No ﬁ ller metal is utilized. Representative welding processes in this group include: ➢ Diffusion welding (DFW). Two surfaces are held together under pressure at an elevated temperature and the parts coalesce by solid-state diffusion. ➢ Friction welding (FRW). Coalescence is achieved by the heat of friction between two surfaces. ➢ Ultrasonic welding (USW). Moderate pressure is applied between the two parts and an oscillating motion at ultrasonic frequencies is used in a direction parallel to the contacting surfaces. The combination of normal and vibratory forces results in shear stresses that remove surface ﬁlms and achieve atomic bonding of the surfaces. The various welding processes are described in greater detail in Chapter 29. The preceding survey should provide a sufﬁcient framework for the discussion of welding terminology and principles in the present chapter. 28.1.2 WELDING AS A COMMERCIAL OPERATION The principal applications of welding are (1) construction, such as buildings and bridges; (2) piping, pressure vessels, boilers, and storage tanks; (3) shipbuilding; (4) aircraft and aerospace;and (5) automotive and railroad [1].Welding is performed in a variety of locations and in a variety of industries. Owing to its versatility as an assembly technique for commercial products, many welding operations are performed in factories. However, several of the traditional processes, such as arc welding and oxyfuel gas welding, use equipment that can be readily moved, so these operations are not limited to the factory. They can be performed at construction sites, in shipyards, at customers’ plants, and in automotive repair shops. Most welding operations are labor intensive. For example, arc welding is usually performed by a skilled worker, called a welder, who manually controls the path or placement of the weld to join individual parts into a larger unit. In factory operations in which arc welding is manually performed, the welder often works with a second worker, called a ﬁ tter. It is the ﬁtter’s job to arrange the individual components for the welder prior to making the weld.Welding ﬁxtures and positioners are used for this purpose. A welding ﬁ xture is a device for clamping and holding the components in ﬁxed position for welding. It is custom-fabricated for the particular geometry of the weldment and therefore must be economically justiﬁed on the basis of the quantities of assemblies to be produced. A welding positioner is a device that holds the parts and also moves the assemblage to the desired position for welding. This differs from a welding ﬁxture that only holds the parts in a single ﬁxed position. The desired position is usually one in which the weld path is ﬂ at and horizontal. The Safety Issue Welding is inherently dangerous to human workers. Strict safety precautions must be practiced by those who perform these operations.The high temperatures of the molten metals in welding are an obvious danger. In gas welding, the fuels (e.g., acetylene) are a ﬁre hazard. Most of the processes use high energy to cause melting of the part surfaces to be joined. In many welding processes, electrical power is the source of thermal energy, so there is the hazard of electrical shock to the worker. Certain welding processes have their own particular perils. In arc welding, for example, ultraviolet radiation is emitted that is injurious to human vision. A special helmet that includes a dark viewing window must be worn by the welder. This window ﬁlters out the dangerous radiation but is so dark that it renders the welder virtually blind, except when the arc is struck. Sparks, spatters of molten metal, smoke,and fumes add to the risks associated with welding operations.Ventilation facilities must be used to exhaust the dangerous fumes generated by some of the ﬂ uxes and molten metals used in welding. If the operation is performed in an enclosed area, special ventilation suits or hoods are required. Automation in Welding Because of the hazards of manual welding, and in efforts to increase productivity and improve product quality, various forms of mechanization and automation have been developed.The categories include machine welding, automatic welding, and robotic welding. Machine welding can be deﬁned as mechanized welding with equipment that performs the operation under the continuous supervision of an operator. It is normally accomplished by a welding head that is moved by mechanical means relative to a stationary work, or by moving the work relative to a stationary welding head. The human worker must continually observe and interact with the equipment to control the operation. If the equipment is capable of performing the operation without control by a human operator, it is referred to as automatic welding. A human worker is usually present to oversee the process and detect variations from normal conditions. What distinguishes automatic welding from machine welding is a weld cycle controller to regulate the arc movement and workpiece positioning without continuous human attention.Automatic welding requires a welding ﬁxture and/or positioner to position the work relative to the welding head. It also requires a higher degree of consistency and accuracy in the component parts used in the weldment. For these reasons, automatic welding can be justiﬁed only for large quantity production. In robotic welding an industrial robot or programmable manipulator is used to automatically control the movement of the welding head relative to the work (Section 37.4). The versatile reach of the robot arm permits the use of relatively simple ﬁxtures, and the robot’s capacity to be reprogrammed for new part conﬁgurations allows this form of automation to be justiﬁed for relatively low production quantities. A typical robotic arc-welding cell consists of two welding ﬁxtures and a human ﬁtter to load and unload parts while the robot welds. In addition to arc welding, industrial robots are also used in automobile ﬁnal assembly plants to perform resistance spot welding on car bodies (Figure 37.16). The Weld Joint Welding produces a solid connection between two pieces,called a weld joint.A weld joint is the junction of the edges or surfaces of parts that have been joined by welding. This section covers two classiﬁcations related to weld joints: (1) types of joints and (2) the types of welds used to join the pieces that form the joints. 28.2.1 TYPES OF JOINTS There are ﬁve basic types of joints for bringing two parts together for joining. The ﬁve joint types are not limited to welding; they apply to other joining and fastening techniques as well. With reference to Figure 28.2, the ﬁve joint types can be deﬁned as follows: (a) Butt joint. In this joint type, the parts lie in the same plane and are joined at their edges. (b) Corner joint. The parts in a corner joint form a right angle and are joined at the corner of the angle. (c) Lap joint. This joint consists of two overlapping parts. (d) Tee joint. In a tee joint, one part is perpendicular to the other in the approximate shape of the letter “T.” (e) Edge joint.The parts in an edge joint are parallel with at least one of their edges in common, and the joint is made at the common edge(s). 28.2.2 TYPES OF WELDS Each of the preceding joints can be made by welding. It is appropriate to distinguish between the joint type and the way in which it is welded—the weld type. Differences among weld types are in geometry (joint type) and welding process. (a) square groove weld, one side; (b) single bevel groove weld; (c) single V-groove weld; (d) single U-groove weld; (e) single J-groove weld; (f) double V-groove weld for thicker sections. Dashed lines show the original part edges. FIGURE 28.5 (a) Plugweld and (b) slot weld. A ﬁ llet weld is used to ﬁll in the edges of plates created by corner, lap, and tee joints, as in Figure 28.3. Filler metal is used to provide a cross section approximately the shape of a right triangle. It is the most common weld type in arc and oxyfuel welding because it requires minimum edge preparation—the basic square edges of the parts are used. Fillet welds can be single or double (i.e., welded on one side or both) and can be continuous or intermittent (i.e., welded along the entire length of the joint or with unwelded spaces along the length). Groove welds usually require that the edges of the parts be shaped into a groove to facilitate weld penetration. The grooved shapes include square, bevel, V, U, and J, in single or double sides, as shown in Figure 28.4. Filler metal is used to ﬁll in the joint, usually by arc or oxyfuel welding. Preparation of the part edges beyond the basic square edge, although requiring additional processing, is often done to increase the strength of the welded joint or where thicker parts are to be welded. Although most closely associated with a butt joint, groove welds are used on all joint types except lap. Plug welds and slot welds are used for attaching ﬂat plates, as shown in Figure 28.5, using one or more holes or slots in the top part and then ﬁlling with ﬁller metal to fuse the two parts together. FIGURE 28.6 (a) Spot weld and (b) seam weld. FIGURE 28.7 (a) Flangeweld and (b) surfacingweld. Spot welds and seam welds, used for lap joints, are diagrammed in Figure 28.6. A spot weld is a small fused section between the surfaces of two sheets or plates. Multiple spot welds are typically required to join the parts. It is most closely it consists of a more or less continuously fused section between the two sheets or plates. Flange welds and surfacing welds are shown in Figure 28.7.A ﬂ ange weld is made on the edges of two (or more) parts, usually sheet metal or thin plate, at least one of the parts being ﬂanged as in Figure 28.7(a).A surfacing weld is not used to join parts, but rather to deposit ﬁller metal onto the surface of a base part in one or more weld beads.The weld beads can be made in a series of overlapping parallel passes,thereby covering large areas of the base part. The purpose is to increase the thickness of the plate or to provide a protective coating on the surface. Physics of Welding Although several coalescing mechanisms are available for welding, fusion is by far the most common means. This section considers the physical relationships that allow fusion welding to be performed. Power density and its importance are ﬁrst examined, and then the heat and power equations that describe a welding process are deﬁ ned. except weldspotatosimilarisweldseamA .weldingresistancewith associated 28.3.1 POWER DENSITY To accomplish fusion, a source of high-density heat energy is supplied to the faying surfaces, and the resulting temperatures are sufﬁcient to cause localized melting of the base metals. If a ﬁller metal is added, the heat density must be high enough to melt it also. Heat density can be deﬁned as the power transferred to the work per unit surface area, W/mm2 (Btu/sec-in2). The time to melt the metal is inversely proportional to the power density. At low power densities, a signiﬁcant amount of time is required to cause melting. If power density is too low, the heat is conducted into the work as rapidly as it is added at the surface, and melting never occurs. It has been found that the minimum power density required to melt most metals in welding is about 10 W/mm2 (6 Btu/sec-in2). As heat density increases, melting time is reduced. If power density is too high—above around 105 W/mm2 (60,000 Btu/sec-in2)—the localized temperatures vaporize the metal in the affected region. Thus, there is a practical range of values for power density within which welding can be performed. Differences among welding processes in this range are (1) the rate at which welding can be performed and/or (2) the size of the region that can be welded. Table 28.1 provides a comparison of power densities for the major fusion welding processes. Oxyfuel gas welding is capable of developing large amounts of heat, but the heat density is relatively low because it is spread over a large area. Oxyacetylene gas, the hottest of the OFW fuels, burns at a top temperature of around 3500°C (6300°F). By comparison, arc welding produces high energy over a smaller area, resulting in local temperatures of 5500°C to 600°C (10,000°F–12,000°F). For metallurgical reasons, it is desirable to melt the metal with minimum energy, and high power densities are generally preferable. Power density can be computed as the power entering the surface divided by the corresponding surface area: PD ! AP (28.1) where PD  power density, W/mm2 (Btu/sec-in2); P  power entering the surface, W (Btu/sec); and A  surface area over which the energy is entering, mm2 (in2).The issue is more complicated than indicated by Equation (28.1). One complication is that the power source (e.g., the arc) is moving in many welding processes, which results in preheating ahead of the operation and postheating behind it. Another complication is that power density is not uniform throughout the affected surface; it is distributed as a function of area, as demonstrated by the following example. TABLE • 28.1 Comparison of several fusion welding processeson the basis of their power densities. A heat source transfers 3000 W to the surface of a metal part. The heat impinges the surface in a circular area, with intensities varying inside the circle. The distribution is as follows: 70% of the power is transferred within a circle of diameter  5 mm, and 90% is transferred within a concentric circle of diameter  12 mm. What are the power densities in (a) the 5-mm-diameter inner circle and (b) the 12-mm-diameter ring that lies around the inner circle? p(5)2 Solution: (a) The inner circle has an area A ! 19.63 mm2 4 The power inside this area P  0.70  3000  2100 W Thus the power density PD ! 2100 ! 107 W/mm2 19.63 p(122  52)(b) The area of the ring outside the inner circle is A  93.4 mm2 4 The power in this region P  0.9 (3000)  2100  600 W. The power density is therefore PD 600 ! 6.4 W/mm2 93.4 Observation: The power density seems high enough for melting in the inner circle, but probably not sufﬁcient in the ring that lies outside this inner circle. 28.3.2 HEAT BALANCE IN FUSION WELDING The quantity of heat required to melt a given volume of metal depends on (1) the heat to raise the temperature of the solid metal to its melting point, which depends on the metal’s volumetric speciﬁc heat, (2) the melting point of the metal, and (3) the heat to transform the metal from solid to liquid phase at the melting point, which depends on the metal’s heat of fusion. To a reasonable approximation, this quantity of heat can be estimated by the following equation [5]: Um ! KTm2 (28.2) where Um  the unit energy for melting (i.e., the quantity of heat required to melt a unit volume of metal starting from room temperature), J/mm3 (Btu/in3); Tm ! melting point of the metal on an absolute temperature scale, °K (°R); and K ! constant whose value is 3.33 " 10–6 when the Kelvin scale is used (and K ! 1.467 " 10–5 for the Rankine temperature scale). Absolute melting temperatures for selected metals are presented in Table 28.2. Not all of the energy generated at the heat source is used to melt the weld metal. There are two heat transfer mechanisms at work, both of which reduce the amount of generated heat that is used by the welding process. The situation is depicted in Figure 28.8. The ﬁrst mechanism involves the transfer of heat between the heat source and the surface of the work.This process has a certain heat transfer factor f1, deﬁned as the ratio of the actual heat received by the workpiece divided by the total heat generated at the source. The second mechanism involves the conduction of heat away from the weld area to be dissipated throughout the work metal, so that only a portion of the heat transferred to the surface is available for melting.This melting factor f2 is the proportion ofheat received at the work surface thatcan be used for melting.The combined effect of these two factors is to reduce the heat energy available for welding as follows: Hw ! f1f2H (28.3) Heat source for welding TABLE • 28.2 Melting temperatures on the absolute temperature scale forselected metals. Based on values in [2]. a Kelvin scale = Centigrade (Celsius) temperature  273. b Rankine scale = Fahrenheit temperature  460. where Hw  net heat available for welding, J (Btu), f1  heat transfer factor, f2  the melting factor, and H  the total heat generated by the welding process, J (Btu). The factors f1 and f2 range in value between zero and one. It is appropriate to separate f1 and f2 in concept, even though they act in concert during the welding process. The heat transfer factor f1 is determined largely by the welding process and the capacity to convert the power source (e.g., electrical energy) into usable heat at the work surface. Arc-welding processes are relatively efﬁcient in this regard, while oxyfuel gas-welding processes are relatively inefﬁcient. The melting factor f2 depends on the welding process, but it is also inﬂuenced by the thermal properties of the metal, joint conﬁguration, and work thickness. Metals with high thermal conductivity, such as aluminum and copper, present a problem in welding because of the rapid dissipation of heat away from the heat contact area. The problem is exacerbated by welding heat sources with low energy (1-f1) Heat losses f1 Heat transferred to work surface densities (e.g., oxyfuel welding) because the heat input is spread over a larger area, thus facilitating conduction into the work. In general, a high power density combined with a low conductivity work material results in a high melting factor. A balance equation between the energy input and the energy needed for welding can now be written: Hw ! UmV (28.4) where Hw ! net heat energy used by the welding operation, J (Btu); Um ! unit energy required to melt the metal, J/mm3 (Btu/in3); and V ! the volume of metal melted, mm3 (in3). Most welding operations are rate processes; that is, the net heat energy Hw is delivered at a given rate, and the weld bead is made at a certain travel velocity. This is characteristic for example of most arc welding, many oxyfuel gas-welding operations, and even some resistance welding operations. It is therefore appropriate to express Equation (28.4) as a rate balance equation: RHw ! UmRWV (28.5) where RHw ! rate of heat energy delivered to the operation for welding, J/s ! W (Btu/min); and RWV ! volume rate of metal welded, mm3/s (in3/min). In the welding of a continuous bead, the volume rate of metal welded is the product of weld area Aw and travel velocity v. Substituting these terms into the above equation, the rate balance equation can now be expressed as RHw ! f1f2RH ! UmAwv (28.6) where f1 and f2 are the heat transfer and melting factors; RH ! rate of input energy generated by the welding power source, W (Btu/min); Aw ! weld cross-sectional area, mm2 (in2); and v  the travel velocity of the welding operation, mm/s (in/min). Chapter 29 examines how the power density in Equation (28.1) and the input energy rate for Equation (28.6) are generated for some of the individual welding processes. The power source in a particular welding setup generates 3500 W that can be transferred to the work surface with a heat transfer factor  0.7. The metal to be welded is low carbon steel, whose melting temperature, from Table 28.2, is 1760K. The melting factor in the operation is 0.5. A continuous ﬁllet weld is to be made with a cross-sectional area  20 mm2. Determine the travel speed at which the welding operation can be accomplished. Solution: First ﬁnd the unit energy required to melt the metal Um from Equation (28.2). Um = 3.33(106)  17602  10.3 J/mm3 f1f2RHRearranging Equation (28.6) to solve for travel velocity, v ! , and UmAw 0.7(0.5)(3500)solving for the conditions of the problem, v ! 5.95 mm/s10.3(20) Features of a Fusion-Welded Joint Most weld joints are fusion welded. As illustrated in the cross-sectional view of Figure 28.9(a), a typical fusion-weld joint in which ﬁller metal has been added consists of several zones: (1) fusion zone, (2) weld interface, (3) heat-affected zone, and (4) unaffected base metal zone. The fusion zone consists of a mixture of ﬁller metal and base metal that have completely melted. This zone is characterized by a high degree of homogeneity among the component metals that have been melted during welding. The mixing of these components is motivated largely by convection in the molten weld pool. Solidiﬁ cation in the fusion zone has similarities to a casting process. In welding the mold is formed by the unmelted edges or surfaces of the components being welded. The signiﬁ cant difference between solidiﬁ cation in casting and in welding is that epitaxial grain growth occurs in welding. The reader may recall that in casting, the metallic grains are formed from the melt by nucleation of solid particles at the mold wall, followed by grain growth. In welding, by contrast, the nucleation stage of solidiﬁ cation is avoided by the mechanism of epitaxial grain growth, in which atoms from the molten pool solidify on preexisting lattice sites of the adjacent solid base metal. Consequently, the grain structure in the fusion zone near the heat affected zone tends to mimic the crystallographic orientation of the surrounding heat-affected zone. Further into the fusion zone, a preferred orientation develops in which the grains are roughly perpendicular to the boundaries of the weld interface. The resulting structure in the solidiﬁed fusion zone tends to feature coarse columnar grains, as depicted in Figure 28.9(b). The grain structure depends on various factors, including welding process, metals being welded (e.g., identical metals vs. dissimilar metals welded), whether a ﬁller metal is used, and the feed rate at which welding is accomplished. A detailed discussion of welding metallurgy is beyond the scope of this text, and interested readers can consult any of several references [1], [4], [5]. The second zone in the weld joint is the weld interface, a narrow boundary that separates the fusion zone from the heat-affected zone.The interface consists of a thin band of base metal that was melted or partially melted (localized melting within the grains) during the welding process but then immediately solidiﬁ ed before any mixing with the metal in the fusion zone. Its chemical composition is therefore identical to that of the base metal. The third zone in the typical fusion weld is the heat-affected zone (HAZ). The metal in this zone has experienced temperatures that are below its melting point, yet high enough to cause microstructural changes in the solid metal. The chemical composition in the heat-affected zone is the same as the base metal, but this region has been heat treated due to the welding temperatures so that its properties and structure have been altered. The amount of metallurgical damage in the HAZ depends on factors such as the amount of heat input and peak temperatures reached, distance from the fusion zone, length of time the metal has been subjected to the high temperatures,cooling rate,and the metal’s thermal properties.The effect on mechanical properties in the heat-affected zone is usually negative, and it is in this region of the weld joint that welding failures often occur. As the distance from the fusion zone increases, the unaffected base metal zone is ﬁnally reached, in which no metallurgical change has occurred. Nevertheless, the base metal surrounding the HAZ is likely to be in a state of high residual stress, the result of shrinkage in the fusion zone. [1]  ASM Handbook,Vol. 6, Welding, Brazing, and Soldering. ASM International, Materials Park,  [4]  Messler, R. W., Jr. Principles of Welding: Processes, Physics, Chemistry, and Metallurgy.  [2]  Ohio, 1993. Cary, H. B., and Helzer, S. C. Modern Welding Technology, 6th ed. Pearson/Prentice-Hall,  [5]  John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1999. Welding Handbook, 9th ed., Vol. 1, Welding Science and Technology. American Welding  [3]  Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2005. Datsko, J. Material Properties and Manufacturing Processes. John Wiley & Sons, New York, 1966.  [6]  Society, Miami, Florida, 2007. Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. IV, Quality Control and Assembly. Society of Man ufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1987.  28.1 What are the advantages and disadvantages of welding compared to other types of assembly operations? 28.2 What were the two discoveries of Sir Humphrey Davy that led to the development of modern welding technology? 28.3 What is meant by the term faying surface? 28.4 Deﬁne the term fusion weld. 28.5 What is the fundamental difference between a fusion weld and a solid state weld? 28.6 What is an autogenous weld? 28.7 Discuss the reasons why most welding operations are inherently dangerous. 28.8 What is the difference between machine welding and automatic welding? 28.9 Name and sketch the ﬁve joint types. 28.10 Deﬁne and sketch a ﬁllet weld. 28.11 Deﬁne and sketch a groove weld. 28.12 Why is a surfacing weld different from the other weld types? 28.13 Why is it desirable to use energy sources for welding that have high heat densities? 28.14 What is the unit melting energy in welding, and what are the factors on which it depends? 28.15 Deﬁne and distinguish the two terms heat transfer factor and melting factor in welding. 28.16 What is the heat-affected zone (HAZ) in a fusion weld? 