IntegratedManufacturingSystems Chapter Contents 38.1 Material Handling 38.2 Fundamentals of Production Lines 38.2.1 Methods of Work Transport 38.2.2 Product Variations 38.3 Manual Assembly Lines 38.3.1 Cycle Time Analysis 38.3.2 Line Balancing and Repositioning Losses 38.4 Automated Production Lines 38.4.1 Types of Automated Lines 38.4.2 Analysis of Automated Production Lines 38.5 Cellular Manufacturing 38.5.1 Part Families 38.5.2 Machine Cells 38.6 Flexible Manufacturing Systems and Cells 38.6.1 Integrating the FMS Components 38.6.2 Applications of Flexible Manufacturing Systems 38.6.3 Mass Customization 38.7 Computer Integrated Manufacturing The manufacturing systems discussed in this chapter consist of multiple workstations and/or machines whose operations are integrated by means of a material handling subsystem that moves parts or products between stations. In addition, most of these systems use computer control to coordinate the actions of the stations and material handling equipment and to collect data on overall system performance. Thus, the components of an integrated manufacturing system are (1) workstations and/or machines, (2) material handling equipment, and (3) computer control. In addition, human workers are required to manage the system, and workers may be used to operate the individual workstations and machines. Integrated manufacturing systems include manual and automated production lines, manufacturing cells (from which the term “cellular manufacturing” is derived), and ﬂexible manufacturing systems, all of which are described in this chapter. The ﬁnal section deﬁnes computer integrated manufacturing (CIM), the ultimate integrated manufacturing system. It is appropriate to begin this chapter with a concise overview of material handling, the physical integrator in integrated manufacturing systems. Material Handling Material handling is deﬁ ned as “the movement, storage, protection and control of materials throughout the manufacturing and distribution process . . .”1 The term is usually associated with activities that occur inside a facility, as contrasted with transportation between facilities that involves rail, truck, air, or waterway delivery of goods. 1This deﬁnition is published each year in the Annual Report of The Material Handling Industry of America (MHIA), the trade association for material handling companies doing business in North America. Materials must be moved during the sequence of manufacturing operations that convert them into ﬁnal products. Material handling functions in manufacturing include (1) loading and positioning work units at each workstation, (2) unloading work units from the station, and (3) transporting work units between workstations. Loading involves moving the work units into the production machine from a location in close proximity to or within the workstation. Positioning means locating the work units in a ﬁxed orientation relative to the processing or assembly operation.At the end of the operation, the work units are unloaded or removed from the station. Loading and unloading are accomplished manually or by automated devices such as industrial robots. If the manufacturing operations require multiple workstations, then the units must be transported from one station to the next in the sequence. In many cases, a temporary storage function must also be provided by the material handling system, as work units await their turn at each workstation. The purpose of storage in this instance is to make sure that work is always present at each station, so that idle time of workers and equipment is avoided. Material handling equipment and methods used in manufacturing can be divided into the following general categories: (1) material transport, (2) storage, and (3) unitizing. Material transport equipment is used to move parts and materials between workstations in the factory.This movement may include intermediate stops for temporary storage of work-in-process. There are ﬁve main types of material transport equipment: (1) industrial trucks, the most important of which are fork lift trucks, (2) automated guided vehicles, (3) rail-guided vehicles, (4) conveyors, and (5) hoists and cranes. This equipment is brieﬂy described in Table 38.1. Two general categories of material transport equipment can be distinguished, according to the type of routing between workstations: ﬁxed and variable. In ﬁxed routing, all of the work units are moved through the same sequence of stations. This implies that the processing sequence required on all work units is either identical or very similar. Fixed routing is used on manual assembly lines and automated production lines. Typical material handling equipment used in ﬁxed routing includes conveyors and rail-guided vehicles. In variable routing, different work units are moved through different workstation sequences, meaning that the manufacturing system processes or TABLE • 38.1 Five types of material transport equipment. FIGURE 38.1 Several types ofmaterial handlingequipment: (a) fork lifttruck, (b) automatedguided vehicle, and(c) roller conveyor. Deck for unit loads Drive Bumper wheels Rolls Frame assembles different types of parts or products. Manufacturing cells and ﬂ exible manufacturing systems usually operate this way. Typical handling equipment found in variable routing includes industrial trucks, automated guided vehicles, and hoists and cranes. Storage systems in factories are used for temporary storage of raw materials, workin-process, and ﬁnished products. Storage systems can be classiﬁed into two general categories: (1) conventional storage methods and equipment, which include bulk storage in an open area, rack systems, and shelves; and (2) automated storage systems, which include rack systems served by automatic cranes that store and retrieve pallet loads. Finally, unitizing refers to containers used to hold individual items during transport and storage, as well as equipment used to make up such unit loads. Containers include pallets, tote pans, boxes, and baskets that hold parts during handling. Unitizing equipment includes palletizers that are used to load and stack cartons onto pallets and depalletizers that are used to accomplish the unloading operation. Palletizers and depalletizers are generally associated with cartons of ﬁnished product leaving a facility and boxes of raw materials coming into the facility, respectively. Section 1.4.1 describes four types of plant layout: (1) ﬁ xed position layout, (2) process layout, (3) cellular layout, and (4) product layout. In general, different types of material handling methods and equipment are associated with these four types, as summarized in Table 38.2. TABLE • 38.2 Types of material handling methods and systems generally associated with the four types of plant layout. Workstations tasks in sync. One problem associated with manual methods of work transport is the difﬁ culty in controlling the production rate on the line. Workers tend to work at a slower pace unless some mechanical means of pacing them is provided. Mechanized Methods of Work Transport Powered mechanical systems are commonly used to move work units along a production line. These systems include liftand-carry devices, pick-and-place mechanisms, powered conveyors (e.g., overhead chain conveyors, belt conveyors, and chain-in-ﬂoor conveyors), and other material handling equipment, sometimes combining several types on the same line. Three major types of work transfer systems are used on production lines: (1) continuous transfer, (2) synchronous transfer, and (3) asynchronous transfer. Continuous transfer systems consist of a continuously moving conveyor that operates at a constant velocity. The continuous transfer system is most common on manual assembly lines. Two cases are distinguished: (1) parts are ﬁxed to the conveyor and (2) parts can be removed from the conveyor. In the ﬁrst case, the product is usually large and heavy (e.g., automobile, washing machine) and cannot be removed from the line. The worker must therefore walk along with the moving conveyor to complete the assigned task for that unit while it is in the station. In the second case, the product is small enough that it can be removed from the conveyor to facilitate the work at each station. Some of the pacing beneﬁts are lost in this arrangement, since each worker is not required to ﬁnish the assigned tasks within a ﬁxed time period. On the other hand, this case allows greater ﬂexibility to each worker to deal with any technical problems that may be encountered on a particular work unit. In synchronous transfer systems, work units are simultaneously moved between stations with a quick, discontinuous motion. These systems are also known by the name intermittent transfer, which characterizes the type of motion experienced by the work units. Synchronous transfer includes positioning of the work at the stations, which is a requirement for automated lines that use this mode of transfer. Synchronous transfer is not common for manual lines, because the task at each and every station must be ﬁnished within the cycle time or the product will leave the station as an incomplete unit. This rigid pacing discipline is stressful to human workers. By contrast, this type of pacing lends itself to automated operation. Asynchronous transfer allows each work unit to depart its current station when processing has been completed. Each unit moves independently, rather than synchronously. Thus, at any given moment, some units on the line are moving between stations, while others are positioned at stations. Associated with the operation of an asynchronous transfer system is the tactical use of queues between stations. Small queues of work units are permitted to form in front of each station, so that variations in worker task times will be averaged and stations will always have work waiting for them. Asynchronous transfer is used for both manual and automated manufacturing systems. 38.2.2 PRODUCT VARIATIONS Production lines can be designed to cope with variations in product models. Three types of line can be distinguished: (1) single model line, (2) batch model line, and (3) mixed model line. A single model line is one that produces only one model, and there is no variation in the model. Thus, the tasks performed at each station are the same on all product units. Batch model and mixed model lines are designed to produce two or more different product models on the same line, but they use different approaches for dealing with the model variations. As its name suggests, a batch model line produces each model in batches.The workstations are set up to produce the desired quantity of the ﬁrst model; then the stations are reconﬁgured to produce the desired quantity of the next model; and so on. Production time is lost between batches due to the setup changes. Assembled products are often made using this approach when the demand for each product is medium and the product variety is also medium. The economics in this case favor the use of one production line for several products rather than using many separate lines for each model. A mixed model line also produces multiple models; however, the models are intermixed on the same line rather than being produced in batches. While a particular model is being worked on at one station, a different model is being processed at the next station. Each station is equipped with the necessary tools and is sufﬁciently versatile to perform the variety of tasks needed to produce any model that moves through it. Many consumer products are assembled on mixed model lines when the level of product variety is soft. Prime examples are automobiles and major appliances, which are characterized by variations in models and options. Manual Assembly Lines The manual assembly line was an important development in integrated manufacturing systems. It is of global importance today in the manufacture of assembled products including automobiles and trucks, consumer electronic products, appliances, power tools, and other products made in large quantities. A manual assembly line consists of multiple workstations arranged sequentially, at which assembly operations are performed by human workers, as in Figure 38.3. The usual procedure on a manual line begins with “launching” a base part onto the FIGURE 38.3 A portionof a manual assembly line. Eachworker performs a taskat his or her workstation. A conveyor movesparts on work carriersfrom one station to the next. front end of the line. A work carrier is often required to hold the part during its movement along the line. The base part travels through each of the stations where workers perform tasks that progressively build the product. Components are added to the base part at each station, so that all tasks have been completed when the product exits the ﬁnal station. Processes accomplished on manual assembly lines include mechanical fastening operations (Chapter 31), spot welding (Section 29.2), hand soldering (Section 30.2), and adhesive joining (Section 30.3). 38.3.1 CYCLE TIME ANALYSIS Equations can be developed to determine the required number of workers and workstations on a manual assembly line to meet a given annual demand. Suppose the problem is to design a single model line to satisfy annual demand for a certain product. Management must decide how many shifts per week the line will operate and the number of hours per shift. If it is assumed that the plant operates 50 weeks per year, then the required hourly production rate of the line will be given by DaRp ! (38.1)50SwHsh where Rp ! the actual average production rate, units/hr; Da ! annual demand for the product, units/year; Sw ! number of shifts/wk; and Hsh ! hours/shift. If the line operates 52 weeks rather than 50, then Rp ! Da/52SwHsh.The corresponding average production time per unit is the reciprocal of Rp 60Tp ! (38.2)Rp where Tp  actual average production time, converted to minutes. Unfortunately, the line may not be able to operate for the entire time given by 50 SwHsh, because of lost time due to reliability problems. These reliability problems include mechanical and electrical failures, tools wearing out, power outages, and similar malfunctions. Accordingly, the line must operate at a faster time than Tp to compensate for these problems. If E ! line efﬁciency, which is the proportion of uptime on the line, then the cycle time of the line Tc is given by 60ETc ! ETp ! (38.3)Rp Any product contains a certain work content that represents all of the tasks that are to be accomplished on the line. This work content requires an amount of time called the work content time Twc. This is the total time required to make the product on the line. If it is assumed that the work content time is divided evenly among the workers, so that every worker has an equal workload whose time to perform equals Tc, then the minimum possible number of workers wmin in the line can be determined as Twc wmin  Minimum Integer " (38.4)Tc If each worker is assigned to a separate workstation, then the number of workstations is equal to the number of workers; that is nmin ! wmin. There are two practical reasons why this minimum number of workers cannot be achieved: (1) imperfect balancing, in which some workers are assigned an amount of work that requires less time than Tc, and this inefﬁciency increases the total number of workers needed on the line; and (2) repositioning losses, in which some time is lost at each station to reposition the work or the worker, so that the service time actually available at each station is less than Tc, and this will also increase the number of workers on the line. 38.3.2 LINE BALANCING AND REPOSITIONING LOSSES One of the biggest technical problems in designing and operating a manual assembly line is line balancing. This is the problem of assigning tasks to individual workers so that all workers have an equal amount of work. Recall that the entirety of work to be accomplished on the line is given by the work content. This total work content can be divided into minimum rational work elements, each element concerned with adding a component or joining them or performing some other small portion of the total work content. The notion of a minimum rational work element is that it is the smallest practical amount of work into which the total job can be divided. Different work elements require different times, and when they are grouped into logical tasks and assigned to workers, the task times will not be equal. Thus, simply due to the variable nature of element times, some workers will end up with more work, whereas other workers will have less.The cycle time of the assembly line is determined by the station with the longest task time. One might think that although the work element times are different, it should be possible to ﬁnd groups of elements whose sums (task times) are nearly equal, if not perfectly equal. What makes it difﬁcult to ﬁnd suitable groups is that there are several constraints on this combinatorial problem. First, the line must be designed to achieve some desired production rate, which establishes the cycle time Tc at which the line must operate, as provided by Equation (38.3). Therefore, the sum of the work element times assigned to each station must be less than or equal to Tc. Second, there are restrictions on the order in which the work elements can be performed. Some elements must be done before others. For example, a hole must be drilled before it can be tapped. A screw that will use the tapped hole to attach a mating component cannot be fastened before the hole has been drilled and tapped. These kinds of requirements on the work sequence are called precedence constraints. They complicate the line balancing problem. A certain element that might be allocated to a worker to obtain a task time ! Tc cannot be added because it violates a precedence constraint. These and other limitations make it virtually impossible to achieve perfect balancing of the line, which means that some workers will require more time to complete their tasks than others. Methods of solving the line balancing problem, that is, allocating work elements to stations, are discussed in other references—excellent references indeed, such as [10]. The inability to achieve perfect balancing results in some idle time at most stations. Because of this idle time, the actual number of workers required on the line will be greater than the number of workstations given by Equation (38.4). A measure of the total idle time on a manual assembly line is given by the balancing efﬁ ciency Eb, deﬁned as the total work content time divided by the total available service time on the line. The total work content time is equal to the sum of the times of all work elements that are to be accomplished on the line. The total available service time on the line ! wTs, where w ! number of workers on the line; and Ts ! the longest service time on the line; that is, Ts ! Max{Tsi} for i ! 1, 2, ... n, where Tsi  the service time (task time) at station i, min. The reader may wonder why a new term Ts is being used rather than the previously deﬁned cycle time Tc.The reason is that there is another time loss in the operation of a production line in addition to idle time from imperfect balancing. Call it the repositioning time Tr. It is the time required in each cycle to reposition the worker, or the work unit, or both. On a continuous transfer line where work units are attached to the line and move at a constant speed, Tr is the time taken by the worker to walk from the unit just completed to the next unit coming into the station. In all manual assembly lines, there will be some lost time due to repositioning. Assume Tr is the same for all workers, although in fact repositioning may require different times at different stations. Then Ts, Tc, and Tr are related as follows: Tc ! Ts # Tr (38.5) The deﬁnition of balancing efﬁciency Eb can now be written in equation form as follows: TwcEb ! (38.6)wTs A perfect line balance yields a value of Eb ! 1.00. Typical line balancing efﬁciencies in industry range between 0.90 and 0.95. Equation (38.6) can be rearranged to obtain the actual number of workers required on a manual assembly line: Twc w  Minimum Integer " (38.7)TsEb The utility of this relationship suffers from the fact that the balancing efﬁciency Eb depends on w in Equation (38.6). Unfortunately, this is an equation where the thing to be determined depends on a parameter that, in turn, depends on the thing itself. Notwithstanding this drawback, Equation (38.7) deﬁnes the relationship among the parameters in a manual assembly line. Using a typical value of Eb based on similar previous lines, it can be used to estimate the number of workers required to produce a given assembly. A manual assembly line is being planned for a product whose annual demand  90,000 units. A continuously moving conveyor will be used with work units attached. Work content time  55 min. The line will run 50 wk/yr, 5 shifts/wk, and 8 hr/day. Each worker will be assigned to a separate workstation. Based on previous experience, assume line efﬁciency  0.95, balancing efﬁciency ! 0.93, and repositioning time  9 sec. Determine (a) hourly production rate to meet demand, (b) number of workers and workstations required, and (c) for comparison, the ideal minimum value as given by wmin in Equation (38.4). Solution: (a) Hourly production rate required to meet annual demand is given by Equation (38.1): 90,000Rp ! 45 units/hr50(5)(8) (b) With a line efﬁciency of 0.95, the ideal cycle time is 60(0.95)Tc ! 1.2667 min 45 Given that repositioning time Tr  9 sec  0.15 min, the service time is Ts  1.2667  0.150  1.1167 min Workers required to operate the line, by Equation (38.7) equals 55 w = Minimum Integer  = 52.96 → 53 workers 1.1167(0.93) With one worker per station, n ! 53 workstations. (c) This compares with the ideal minimum number of workers given by Equation (38.4): 55 wmin = Minimum Integer  = 43.42 → 44 workers 1.2667 It is clear from Example 38.1 that the lost time due to repositioning and imperfect line balancing take a heavy toll on the overall efﬁciency of a manual assembly line. The number of workstations on a manual assembly line does not necessarily equal the number of workers. For large products, it may be possible to assign more than one worker to a station. This practice is common in ﬁnal assembly plants that build cars and trucks. For example, two workers in a station might perform assembly tasks on opposite sides of the vehicle. The number of workers in a given station is called the station manning level Mi. Averaging the manning levels over the entire line, wM ! (38.8)n where M ! average manning level for the assembly line; w ! number of workers on the line; and n ! number of stations. Naturally, w and n must be integers. Multiple manning conserves valuable ﬂoor space in the factory because it reduces the number of stations required. Another factor that affects manning level on an assembly line is the number of automated stations on the line, including stations that employ industrial robots (Section 38.4). Automation reduces the required labor force on the line, although it increases the need for technically trained personnel to service and maintain the automated stations. The automobile industry makes extensive use of robotic workstations to perform spot welding and spray painting on sheet-metal car bodies. The robots accomplish these operations with greater repeatability than human workers can, which translates into higher product quality. Automated Production Lines Manual assembly lines generally use a mechanized transfer system to move parts between workstations, but the stations themselves are operated by human workers. An automated production line consists of automated workstations connected by a parts transfer system that is coordinated with the stations. In the ideal, no human workers are on the line, except to perform auxiliary functions such as tool changing, loading and unloading parts at the beginning and end of the line, and repair and maintenance activities. Modern automated lines are highly integrated systems, operating under computer control. Operations performed by automated stations tend to be simpler than those performed by humans on manual lines. The reason is that simpler tasks are easier to automate. Operations that are difﬁcult to automate are those requiring multiple steps, judgment, or human sensory capability. Tasks that are easy to automate consist of single work elements, quick actuating motions, and straight-line feed motions as in machining. 38.4.1 TYPES OF AUTOMATED LINES Automated production lines can be divided into two basic categories: (1) those that perform processing operations such as machining, and (2) those that perform assembly operations. An important type in the processing category is the transfer line. Transfer Lines and Similar Processing Systems A transfer line consists of a sequence of workstations that perform production operations, with automatic transfer of work units between stations. Machining is the most common processing operation, as depicted in Figure 38.4. Automatic transfer systems for sheet metalworking and assembly are also available. In the case of machining, the workpiece typically starts as a metal casting or forging, and a series of machining operations are performed to accomplish the high-precision details (e.g., holes, threads, and ﬁnished ﬂat surfaces). Transfer lines are usually expensive pieces of equipment, sometimes costing millions of dollars; they are designed for high part quantities. The amount of machining accomplished on the work part is often signiﬁcant, but since the work is divided among many stations, production rates are high and unit costs are low compared to alternative production methods. Synchronous transfer of work units between stations is commonly used on automated machining lines. FIGURE 38.4 A machining transferline, an important typeof automated production line. FIGURE 38.5 Conﬁguration of a dial-indexing machine. In-line transfer A variation of the automated transfer line is the dial indexing machine, Figure 38.5, in which workstations are arranged around a circular worktable, called a dial. The worktable is actuated by a mechanism that provides partial rotation of the table on each work cycle. The number of rotational positions is designed to match the number of workstations around the periphery of the table.Although the conﬁguration of a dial-indexing machine is quite different from a transfer line, its operation and application are quite similar. Automated Assembly Systems Automated assembly systems consist of one or more workstations that perform assembly operations, such as adding components and/or afﬁxing them to the work unit. Automated assembly systems can be divided into single station cells and multiple station systems. Single station assembly cells are often organized around an industrial robot that has been programmed to perform a sequence of assembly steps. The robot cannot work as fast as a series of specialized automatic stations, so single station cells are used for jobs in the medium production range. Multiple station assembly systems are appropriate for high production. They are widely used for mass production of small products such as ball-point pens, cigarette lighters, ﬂashlights, and similar items consisting of a limited number of components. The number of components and assembly steps is limited because system reliability decreases rapidly with increasing complexity. Multiple station assembly systems are available in several conﬁgurations, pictured in Figure 38.6:(a) in-line,(b) rotary,and (c) carousel.The in-line conﬁguration is the conventional transfer line adapted to perform assembly work.These systems are not as massive as their machining counterparts. Rotary systems are usually implemented Workstations Rotarytransfer table Workstations Carousel(a) (b) (c) FIGURE 38.6 Three common conﬁgurations of multiple station assembly systems: (a) in-line, (b) rotary, and (c) carousel. as dial indexing machines. Carousel assembly systems are arranged as a loop. They can be designed with a greater number of workstations than a rotary system. Owing to the loop conﬁguration, the carousel allows the work carriers to be automatically returned to the starting point for reuse, an advantage shared with rotary systems but not with transfer lines unless provision for their return is made in the design. 38.4.2 ANALYSIS OF AUTOMATED PRODUCTION LINES Line balancing is a problem on an automated line, just as it is on a manual assembly line. The total work content must be allocated to individual workstations. However, since the tasks assigned to automated stations are generally simpler, and the line often contains fewer stations, the problem of deﬁning what work should be done at each station is not as difﬁcult for an automated line as for a manual line. A more signiﬁcant problem in automated lines is reliability. The line consists of multiple stations, interconnected by a work transfer system. It operates as an integrated system, and when one station malfunctions, the entire system is adversely affected. To analyze the operation of an automated production line, assume a system that performs processing operations and uses synchronous transfer. This model includes transfer lines as well as dial indexing machines. It does not include automated assembly systems, which require an adaptation of the model [10]. The terminology will borrow symbols from the ﬁrst two sections: n  number of workstations on the line; Tc ! ideal cycle time on the line; Tr ! repositioning time, called the transfer time in a transfer line; and Tsi ! the service time at station i. The ideal cycle time Tc is the service time (processing time) for the slowest station on the line plus the transfer time; that is, Tc ! Tr  Max {Tsi} (38.9) In the operation of a transfer line, periodic breakdowns cause downtime on the entire line. Let F ! frequency with which breakdowns occur, causing a line stoppage; and Td ! average time the line is down when a breakdown occurs. The downtime includes the time for the repair crew to swing into action, diagnose the cause of the failure, ﬁx it, and restart the line. Based on these deﬁnitions, the following expression can be formulated for the actual average production time Tp: Tp ! Tc # FTd (38.10) where F  downtime frequency, line stops/cycle; and Td  downtime in minutes per line stop. Thus, FTd ! average downtime per cycle. The actual average production rate Rp ! 60/Tp, as previously given in Equation (38.2). It is of interest to compare this rate with the ideal production rate given by 60Rc ! (38.11)Tc where Rp and Rc are expressed in pc/hour, given that Tp and Tc are expressed in minutes. Using these deﬁnitions, the line efﬁ ciency E for a transfer line can be deﬁned. In the context of automated manufacturing systems, E refers to the proportion of uptime on the line and is really a measure of availability (Section 1.5.2) rather than efﬁ ciency: TcE ! (38.12)Tc # FTd This is the same relationship as earlier Equation (38.3), since Tp ! Tc # FTd. It should be noted that the same deﬁnition of line efﬁciency applies to manual assembly lines, except that technological breakdowns are not as much of a problem on manual lines (human workers are more reliable than electromechanical equipment, at least in the sense discussed here). Line downtime is usually associated with failures at individual workstations. Reasons for downtime include scheduled and unscheduled tool changes, mechanical and electrical malfunctions, hydraulic failures, and normal equipment wear. Let pi  probability or frequency of a failure at station i, then F = ! n pi (38.13) i–1 If all pi are assumed equal, or an average value of pi is computed, in either case calling it p, then F ! np (38.14) Both of these equations clearly indicate that the frequency of line stops increases with the number of stations on the line. Stated another way, the reliability of the line decreases as the number of stations is increased. An automated transfer line has 20 stations and an ideal cycle time of 1.0 min. Probability of a station failure is p  0.01, and the average downtime when a breakdown occurs is 10 min. Determine (a) average production rate Rp and (b) line efﬁciency E. Solution: The frequency of breakdowns on the line is given by F ! pn ! 0.01(20)  0.20. The actual average production time is therefore Tp  1.0  0.20(10)  3.0 min (a) Production rate is therefore 60 60Rp  = 20 pc/hrTp 3.0 Note that this is far lower than the ideal production rate: 60 60Rc  = 60 pc/hrTc 1.0 (b) Line efﬁciency is computed as Tc 1.0E  = 0.333 (or 33.3%)Tp 3.0 This example clearly demonstrates how a production line with many workstations, a high average downtime per breakdown, and a seemingly low probability of station failure can spend more time down than up.Achieving high line efﬁciencies is a real problem in automated production lines. The cost of operating an automated production line is the investment cost of the equipment and installation, plus the cost of maintenance, utilities, and labor assigned to the line. These costs are converted to an equivalent uniform annual cost and divided by the number of hours of operation per year to provide an hourly rate. This hourly cost rate can be used to ﬁgure the unit cost of processing a work part on the line CoTpCp ! (38.15)60 where Cp ! unit processing cost, $/part; Co ! hourly rate of operating the line, as deﬁned above, $/hr; Tp ! actual average production time per work part, min/part; and the constant 60 converts the hourly cost rate to $/min for consistency of units. Cellular Manufacturing Cellular manufacturing refers to the use of work cells that specialize in the production of families of parts or products made in medium quantities. Parts (and products) in this quantity range are traditionally made in batches, and batch production requires downtime for setup changeovers and has high inventory carrying costs. Cellular manufacturing is based on an approach called group technology (GT), which minimizes the disadvantages of batch production by recognizing that although the parts are different, they also possess similarities. When these similarities are exploited in production, operating efﬁciencies are improved. The improvement is typically achieved by organizing the production around manufacturing cells. Each cell is designed to produce one part family (or a limited number of part families), thereby following the principle of specialization of operations.The cell includes special production equipment and custom-designed tools and ﬁxtures, so that the production of the part families can be optimized. In effect, each cell becomes a factory within the factory. 38.5.1 PART FAMILIES A central feature of cellular manufacturing and group technology is the part family. A part family is a group of parts that possess similarities in geometric shape and size, or in the processing steps used in their manufacture. It is not unusual for a factory that produces 10,000 different parts to be able to group most of those parts into 20 to 30 part families.In each part family the processing steps are similar.There are always differences among parts in a family, but the similarities are close enough that the parts can be grouped into the same family. Figures 38.7 and 38.8 show two different part families.The parts shown in Figure 38.7 have the same size and shape; however, their processing requirements are quite different because of differences in work material, production quantities, and design tolerances. Figure 38.8 shows several parts with geometries that differ, but their manufacturing requirements are quite similar. FIGURE 38.7 Two parts that are identicalin shape and size butquite different inmanufacturing:(a) 1,000,000 units/yr, tolerance 0.010 in., 1015 CR steel, nickel plate; and (b) 100/yr, tolerance 0.001 in, 18-8 stainless steel. FIGURE 38.8 Ten parts that are differentin size and shape, butquite similar in termsof manufacturing. Allparts are machinedfrom cylindrical stockby turning; some partsrequire drilling and/ormilling. There are several ways by which part families are identiﬁed in industry. One method involves visual inspection of all the parts made in the factory (or photos of the parts) and using best judgment to group them into appropriate families.Another approach, called production ﬂ ow analysis, uses information contained on route sheets (Section 39.1.1) to classify parts. In effect, parts with similar manufacturing steps are grouped into the same family. A third method, usually the most expensive but most useful, is parts classiﬁcation and coding. Parts classiﬁcation and coding involve the identiﬁcation of similarities and differences among parts and relating these parts by means of a numerical coding scheme. Most classiﬁcation and coding systems are one of the following: (1) systems based on part design attributes, (2) systems based on part manufacturing attributes, and (3) systems based on both design and manufacturing attributes. Common part design and manufacturing attributes used in GT systems are presented in Table 38.3. Because each company produces a unique set of parts and products, a classiﬁcation and coding system that may be satisfactory for one company is not necessarily appropriate for another company. Each company must design its own coding TABLE • 38.3 Design and manufacturing attributes typically included in a parts classiﬁcation and coding system. scheme. Parts classiﬁcation and coding systems are described more thoroughly in several of the references [8], [10], [11]. Beneﬁts often cited for a well-designed classiﬁcation and coding system include that it (1) facilitates formation of part families, (2) permits quick retrieval of part design drawings, (3) reduces design duplication because similar or identical part designs can be retrieved and reused rather than designed from scratch, (4) promotes design standardization, (5) improves cost estimating and cost accounting, (6) facilitates numerical control (NC) part programming by allowing new parts to use the same basic part program as existing parts in the same family, (7) allows sharing of tools and ﬁxtures, and (8) aids computer-aided process planning (CAPP) (Section 39.1.3) because standard process plans can be correlated to part family code numbers, so that existing process plans can be reused or edited for new parts in the same family. 38.5.2 MACHINE CELLS To fully exploit the similarities among parts in a family, production should be organized using machine cells designed to specialize in making those particular parts. One of the principles in designing a group technology machine cell is the composite part concept. Composite Part Concept Members of a part family possess similar design and/ or manufacturing features. There is usually a correlation between part design features and the manufacturing operations that produce those features. Round holes are made by drilling; cylindrical shapes are made by turning; and so on. The composite part for a given family (not to be confused with a part made of composite material) is a hypothetical part that includes all of the design and manufacturing attributes of the family. In general, an individual part in the family will have some of the features that characterize the family, but not all of them. A production cell designed for the part family would include those machines required to make the composite part. Such a cell would be capable of producing any member of the family, simply by omitting those operations corresponding to features not possessed by the particular part.The cell would also be designed to allow for size variations within the family as well as feature variations. To illustrate, consider the composite part in Figure 38.9(a). It represents a family of rotational parts with features deﬁned in part (b) of the ﬁgure. Associated FIGURE 38.9 Composite part concept: (a) the composite part for a family of machined rotational parts, and (b) theindividual features of the composite part. with each feature is a certain machining operation, as summarized in Table 38.4. A machine cell to produce this part family would be designed with the capability to accomplish all of the operations in the last column of the table. Machine Cell Designs Machine cells can be classiﬁed according to number of machines and level of automation. The possibilities are (a) single machine, (b) multiple machines with manual handling, (c) multiple machines with mechanized handling, (d) ﬂexible manufacturing cell, or (e) ﬂexible manufacturing system. These production cells are depicted in Figure 38.10. The single machine cell has one machine that is manually operated. The cell would also include ﬁxtures and tools to allow for feature and size variations within the part family produced by the cell.The machine cell required for the part family of Figure 38.9 would probably be of this type. Multiple machine cells have two or more manually operated machines. These cells are distinguished by the method of work part handling in the cell, manual or mechanized. Manual handling means that parts are moved within the cell by workers, usually the machine operators. Mechanized handling refers to conveyorized TABLE • 38.4 Design features of the composite part in Figure 38.3 and the manufacturing operations required to shape those features. FIGURE 38.10 Types of group technology machinecells: (a) singlemachine, (b) multiplemachines with manual handling, (c) multiplemachines with mechanized handling,(d) ﬂexible manufacturing cell, and(e) ﬂexible manufacturing system.Key: Man  manual operation; Aut ! automated station. transfer of parts from one machine to the next. This may be required by the size and weight of the parts made in the cell, or simply to increase production rate. The sketch depicts the work ﬂow as being a line; other layouts are also possible, such as U-shaped or loop. Flexible manufacturing cells and ﬂexible manufacturing systems consist of automated machines with automated handling. Given the special nature of these integrated manufacturing systems and their importance, Section 38.6 is devoted to this topic. Beneﬁts and Problems in Group Technology The use of machine cells and group technology provide substantial beneﬁts to companies that have the discipline and perseverance to implement it. The potential beneﬁts include the following: (1) GT promotes standardization of tooling, ﬁxturing, and setups; (2) material handling is reduced because parts are moved within a machine cell rather than the entire factory; (3) production scheduling is simpliﬁed; (4) manufacturing lead time is reduced; (5) work-in-process is reduced; (6) process planning is simpler; (7) worker satisfaction usually improves working in a cell; and (8) higher quality work is accomplished. There are several problems in implementing machine cells, however. One obvious problem is rearranging production machines in the plant into the appropriate machine cells. It takes time to plan and accomplish this rearrangement, and the machines are not producing during the changeover. The biggest problem in starting a GT program is identifying the part families. If the plant makes 10,000 different parts, reviewing all of the part drawings and grouping the parts into families are substantial tasks that consume a signiﬁcant amount of time. Flexible Manufacturing Systems and Cells A ﬂexible manufacturing system (FMS) is a highly automated group technology machine cell, consisting of a multiple processing stations (usually computer numerical control machine tools), interconnected by an automated material handling and storage system, and controlled by an integrated computer system. An FMS is capable of processing a variety of different part styles simultaneously under NC program control at the different workstations. An FMS relies on the principles of group technology. No manufacturing system can be completely ﬂexible. It cannot produce an inﬁnite range of parts or products. There are limits to how much ﬂexibility can be incorporated into an FMS. Accordingly, a ﬂexible manufacturing system is designed to produce parts (or products) within a range of styles, sizes, and processes. In other words, an FMS is capable of producing a single part family or a limited range of part families. Flexible manufacturing systems vary in terms of number of machine tools and level of ﬂexibility.When the system has only a few machines,the term ﬂ exible manufacturing cell (FMC) is sometimes used. Both cell and system are highly automated and computer controlled.The difference between an FMS and an FMC is not always clear, but it is sometimes based on the number of machines (workstations) included. The ﬂ exible manufacturing system consists of four or more machines, whereas a ﬂexible manufacturing cell consists of three or fewer machines [10]. To qualify as being ﬂ exible, a manufacturing system should satisfy several criteria. The tests of ﬂexibility in an automated manufacturing system are the capability to (1) process different part styles in a nonbatch mode, (2) accept changes in production schedule, (3) respond gracefully to equipment malfunctions and breakdowns in the system,and (4) accommodate the introduction of new part designs.These capabilities are made possible by the use of a central computer that controls and coordinates the components of the system. The most important criteria are (1) and (2). Criteria (3) and (4) are less critical and can be implemented at various levels of sophistication. 38.6.1 INTEGRATING THE FMS COMPONENTS An FMS consists of hardware and software that must be integrated into an efﬁ cient and reliable unit.It also includes human personnel.This section examines these components and how they are integrated. Hardware Components FMS hardware includes workstations, material handling system, and central control computer. The workstations are CNC machines in a machining type system, plus inspection stations, parts cleaning and other stations, as required. A central chip conveyor system is often installed below ﬂoor level. The material handling system is the means by which parts are moved between stations. The material handling system usually includes a limited capability to store parts. Handling systems suitable for automated manufacturing include roller conveyors, automated guided vehicles, and industrial robots. The most appropriate type depends on part size and geometry, as well as factors relating to economics and compatibility with other FMS components. Nonrotational parts are often moved in a FMS on pallet ﬁxtures, so the pallets are designed for the particular handling system, and the ﬁxtures are designed to accommodate the various part geometries in the family. Rotational parts are often handled by robots, if weight is not a limiting factor. The handling system establishes the basic layout of the FMS. Five layout types can be distinguished: (1) in-line, (2) loop, (3) ladder, (4) open ﬁeld, and (5) robot-centered cell.Types 1,3,4,and 5 are shown in Figure 38.11.Type 2 is shown in Figure 38.10(e). The in-line layout uses a linear transfer system to move parts between processing stations and load/unload station(s). The in-line transfer system is usually capable of two-directional movement; if not, then the FMS operates much like a transfer line, and the different part styles made on the system must follow the same basic processing sequence due to the one-direction ﬂow. The loop layout consists of a conveyor loop with workstations located around its periphery. This conﬁguration permits any processing sequence, because any station is accessible from any other station. This is also true for the ladder layout, in which workstations are located on the rungs of the ladder. The open ﬁ eld layout is the most complex FMS conﬁguration, and consists of several loops tied together. Finally, the robot-centered cell consists of a robot whose work volume includes the load/unload positions of the machines in the cell. The FMS also includes a central computer that is interfaced to the other hardware components. In addition to the central computer, the individual machines and other components generally have microcomputers as their individual control units. The function of the central computer is to coordinate the activities of the components so as to achieve a smooth overall operation of the system. It accomplishes this function by means of software. FMS Software and Control Functions FMS software consists of modules associated with the various functions performed by the manufacturing system. For example, one function involves downloading NC part programs to the individual machine tools; another function is concerned with controlling the material handling system; another is concerned with tool management; and so on. Table 38.5 lists the functions included in the operation of a typical FMS. Associated with each function are one or more software modules. The functions and modules are largely application speciﬁ c. Human Labor An additional component in the operation of a ﬂexible manufacturing system or cell is human labor. Duties performed by human workers include (1) loading and unloading parts from the system, (2) changing and setting cutting tools, (3) maintenance and repair of equipment, (4) NC part programming, (5) programming and operating the computer system, and (6) overall management of the system. 38.6.2 APPLICATIONS OF FLEXIBLE MANUFACTURING SYSTEMS Flexible manufacturing systems are typically used for mid-volume, mid-variety production. If the part or product is made in high quantities with no style variations, then a transfer line or similar dedicated manufacturing system is most appropriate. If the parts are low volume with high variety, then a stand-alone NC machine or even (a) Conveyor v Parts in Parts out Machine v(b) FIGURE 38.11 Four of the ﬁve FMS layout types: (a) in-line,(b) ladder, (c) open ﬁeld, and (d) robot-centeredcell. Key: Aut  automated station; L/UL ! load/unload station;Insp  inspection station; AGV  automated guided vehicle; AGVS ! automated guided vehicle system. TABLE • 38.5 Typical computer functions implemented by application software modules in a ﬂexible manufacturing system. Key: NC  numericals control, APT  automatically programmed tooling, FMS  ﬂexible manufacturing system. manual methods would be more appropriate. These application characteristics are summarized in Figure 38.12. Flexible machining systems comprise the most common application of FMS technology. Owing to the inherent ﬂexibilities and capabilities of computer numerical control, it is possible to connect several CNC machine tools to a small central computer, and to devise automated material handling methods for transferring parts between machines. Figure 38.13 shows a ﬂexible machining system consisting of ﬁve CNC machining centers and an in-line transfer system to pick up parts from a central load/unload station and move them to the appropriate machining stations. FIGURE 38.12 Applicationcharacteristics of ﬂexible manufacturing systems and cellsrelative to other typesof manufacturing systems. FIGURE 38.13 A ﬁve-station ﬂexible manufacturing system.(Photo courtesy ofCincinnati Milacron.) In addition to machining systems, other types of ﬂexible manufacturing systems have also been developed, although the state of technology in these other processes has not permitted the rapid implementation that has occurred in machining. The other types of systems include assembly, inspection, sheet-metal processing (punching, shearing, bending, and forming), and forging. Most of the experience in ﬂexible manufacturing systems has been gained in machining applications. For ﬂexible machining systems, the beneﬁts usually given are (1) higher machine utilization than a conventional machine shop (relative utilizations are 40% to 50% for conventional batch type operations compared with about 75% for a FMS because of better work handling, ofﬂine setups, and improved scheduling); (2) reduced work-in-process due to continuous production rather than batch production; (3) lower manufacturing lead times; and (4) greater ﬂexibility in production scheduling. 38.6.3 MASS CUSTOMIZATION Taken to its limit, ﬂexible manufacturing is capable of producing a unique product for each customer.This capability is called mass customization,in which a large variety of products are made at efﬁciencies approaching those of mass production. Each product is individually customized according to speciﬁcations of individual customers. Referring back to the deﬁnitions of production quantity and product variety in Section 1.1.2, the distinction between mass production and mass customization is indicated in Table 38.6. In the extreme, mass production is the production of very TABLE • 38.6 Comparison between mass production and mass customization. large quantities of one product style. Similarly, mass customization involves large product variety and only one unit is produced of each product style. The challenge for the mass customizer is to manage its design and production operations without the waste associated with needless product proliferation, in which the company offers its customers so many choices among products and available options that it is unproﬁtable. The following example illustrates product proliferation at its worst. A few decades ago, one of the truck manufacturers in the United States offered its customers a wide variety of model choices and options. Any of more than 100 truck models could be ordered, and each model was available in 7 different wheel bases. The customer could select among 42 basic engines, 43 different front axles, 62 transmissions, and 162 different rear axles. Thus, the company offered its customers a choice among 100(7)(42)(43)(62)(162)  130(108) possible combinations. At its peak, the company had an annual production of 130,000 trucks. If each customer were to order a different truck, the company could produce trucks for 130(108)  10,000 years without ever producing the same truck twice. 130,000 The negative consequences of product proliferation include (1) large raw material, work-in-process, and ﬁnished product inventories; (2) high purchasing costs; (3) large ﬂoor space requirements, (4) too many setups and too much tooling, (5) a costly overhead to manage the variety, (6) much marketing literature and design data; and (7) customer confusion. So the question is: How can a company offer customized product variety while at the same time avoiding the negative consequences of product proliferation? The successful mass customizer can use a number of strategies to operate efﬁ ciently in the face of a large product variety. They include: (1) soft product variety, (2) design modularity, (3) postponement, and (4) designing the product to be easily customized. Large product variety does not mean hard product variety, recalling the terminology of Section 1.1.2. Indeed, mass customization would not be feasible unless soft product variety were practiced by the company that offered customized products to its customers. Soft product variety means that there are only small differences among available products. The differences may appear signiﬁcant to the customer, but to the company, they are easily managed in production. The company’s strategy is to minimize the real differences among its products while enticing the customer to appreciate the product differentiation; for example, offering a product in which all internal components are identical but the product is available in a variety of external colors. Modularity in product design is another approach used by mass customizers, in which the product consists of standard modules that can be assembled in unique combinations to satisfy individual customers’ speciﬁcations. The modules are standard building blocks that are perhaps mass produced, but they combine in different ways to achieve a singular product. Of course, the modules must be designed in such a way that facilitates their assembly. An example is the personal computer. Each PC customer speciﬁes from a variety of features and options, all of which relate to hardware and software modules that are assembled and loaded to meet the speciﬁ cations. Postponement is closely related to design modularity. It means that the mass customizer waits until the last possible moment to complete the product which occurs after a customer order has been received. The alternative is carrying a large inventory of ﬁnished products that match all of the possible combinations of speciﬁcations that customers might want. Finally, the mass customizer designs the product so that it can be readily customized. The customization can be accomplished at the last moment by the manufacturer, as in postponement, or it can be accomplished by the merchant who deals directly with the customer. An example of customization by the manufacturer is when the customer can select among alternative design parameters and options that are available, and the product is then made to those speciﬁ cations. Automobiles are sometimes purchased this way.An example of merchant customization is when paint dealers mix colorants with a standard neutral base paint to achieve the exact color desired by the customer. The mass customizer may also design adjustability into the product, so that the customers themselves can individualize the product. Examples of product adjustability include car seat adjustments made by the driver and software settings made by users of personal computers. Computer Integrated Manufacturing Distributed computer networks are widely used in modern manufacturing plants to monitor and/or control the integrated systems described in this chapter. Even though some of the operations are manually accomplished (e.g., manual assembly lines and manned cells), computer systems are utilized for production scheduling, data collection, record keeping, performance tracking, and other information-related functions. In the more automated systems (e.g., transfer lines and ﬂexible manufacturing cells), computers directly control the operations. The term computer integrated manufacturing (CIM) refers to the pervasive use of computer systems throughout the organization, not only to monitor and control the operations, but also to design the product, plan the manufacturing processes, and accomplish the business functions related to production. One might say that CIM is the ultimate integrated manufacturing system. In this ﬁnal section of Part X, the scope of CIM is outlined, and a bridge is provided to Part XI on manufacturing support systems. To begin, there are four general functions that have to be accomplished in most manufacturing enterprises: (1) product design, (2) manufacturing planning, (3) manufacturing control, and (4) business functions. Product design is usually an iterative process that includes recognition of a need for a product, problem deﬁ nition, creative CIM Customer feedback to design FIGURE 38.14 Four general functions in a manufacturing organization, and how computer integrated manufacturingsystems support these functions. synthesis of a solution, analysis and optimization, evaluation, and documentation. The overall quality of the resulting design is likely to be the most important factor upon which the commercial success of a product depends. In addition, a very signiﬁ cant portion of the ﬁnal cost of the product is determined by decisions made during product design. Manufacturing planning is concerned with converting the engineering drawings and speciﬁcations that deﬁne the product design into a plan for producing the product. Manufacturing planning includes decisions on which parts will be purchased (the “make-or-buy decision”), how each “make” part will be produced, the equipment that will be used, how the work will be scheduled, and so on. Most of these decisions are discussed in Chapter 39 on process planning and production control. Manufacturing control includes not only control of the individual processes and equipment in the plant, but also the supporting functions such as shop ﬂ oor control (Section 39.3.4) and quality control (Chapter 40). Finally, the business functions include order entry, cost accounting, payroll, customer billing, and other business-oriented information activities related to manufacturing. Computer systems play an important role in these four general functions, and their integration within the organization is a distinguishing feature of computer integrated manufacturing, as depicted in Figure 38.14. Computer systems associated with product design are called CAD systems (for computer-aided design). Design systems and software include geometric modeling, engineering analysis packages such as ﬁnite element modeling, design review and evaluation, and automated drafting. Computer systems that support manufacturing planning are called CAM systems (for computer-aided manufacturing) and include computer-aided process planning (CAPP, Section 39.1.3), NC part programming (Section 38.3.3), production scheduling (Section 39.3.1), and planning packages such as material requirements planning (Section 39.3.2). Manufacturing control systems include those used in process control, shop ﬂoor control, inventory control, and computer-aided inspection for quality control. And computerized business systems are used for order entry, customer billing, and other business functions. Customer orders are entered by the company’s sales force or by the customers themselves into the computerized order entry system. The orders include product speciﬁcations that provide the inputs to the design department. Based on these inputs, new products are designed on the company’s CAD system. The design details serve as inputs to the manufacturing engineering group, where computer-aided process planning, computer-aided tool design, and related activities are performed in advance of actual production. The output from manufacturing engineering provides much of the input data required for manufacturing resource planning and production scheduling. Thus, computer integrated manufacturing provides the information ﬂows required to accomplish the actual production of the product. Today, computer integrated manufacturing is implemented in many companies using enterprise resource planning (ERP), a computer software system that organizes and integrates the information ﬂows in an organization through a single, central database. ERP is described in Section 39.3.5. [1] Black, J. T. The Design of the Factory with a Future, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1990. [2] Black, J. T. “An Overview of Cellular Manufacturing Systems and Comparison to Conventional Systems,” Industrial Engineering, November 1983, pp. 36–84. [3] Boothroyd, G., Poli, C., and Murch, L. E. Automatic Assembly. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1982. [4] Buzacott, J. A. “Prediction of the Efﬁciency of Production Systems without Internal Storage,” International Journal of Production Research, Vol. 6, No. 3, 1968, pp. 173–188. [5] Buzacott, J. A., and Shanthikumar, J. G. Stochastic Models of Manufacturing Systems. Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 1993. [6] Chang, T-C, Wysk, R. A., and Wang, H-P. Computer-Aided Manufacturing, 3rd ed. Prentice Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2005. [7] Chow, W-M. Assembly Line Design. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1990. [8] Gallagher, C. C., and Knight, W. A. Group Technology, Butterworth & Co., London, 1973. [9] Groover, M. P. “Analyzing Automatic Transfer Lines,” Industrial Engineering, Vol. 7, No. 11, 1975, pp. 26–31. [10] Groover, M. P. Automation, Production Systems, and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd ed. Pearson Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2008. [11] Ham, I., Hitomi, K., and Yoshida, T. Group Technology, Kluwer Nijhoff Publishers, Hing-ham, Massachusetts, 1985. [12] Houtzeel, A. “The Many Faces of Group Technology,” American Machinist, January 1979, pp. 115–120. [13] Luggen, W. W. Flexible Manufacturing Cells and Systems, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1991. [14] Maleki, R. A. Flexible Manufacturing Systems: The Technology and Management, Prentice Hall, Englewood Cliffs, New Jersey, 1991. [15] Moodie, C., Uzsoy, R., and Yih, Y. Manufacturing Cells: A Systems Engineering View, Taylor & Francis, London, 1995. [16] Parsai, H., Leep, H., and Jeon, G. The Principles of Group Technology and Cellular Manufacturing, John Wiley & Sons, Hoboken, New Jersey, 2006. [17] Pine II, B. J. Mass Customization. Harvard Business School Press, Cambridge, Massachusetts, 1993. [18] Riley, F. J. Assembly Automation, A Management Handbook, 2nd ed. Industrial Press, New York, 1999. [19] Weber, A. “Is Flexibility a Myth?” Assembly, May 2004, pp. 50–59. 