Mechanical31 Assembly Chapter Contents 31.1 Threaded Fasteners 31.1.1 Screws, Bolts, and Nuts 31.1.2 Other Threaded Fasteners and Related Hardware 31.1.3 Stresses and Strengths in Bolted Joints 31.1.4 Tools and Methods for Threaded Fasteners 31.2 Rivets and Eyelets 31.3 Assembly Methods Based on Interference Fits 31.4 Other Mechanical Fastening Methods 31.5 Molding Inserts and Integral Fasteners 31.6 Design for Assembly 31.6.1 General Principles of DFA 31.6.2 Design for Automated Assembly Mechanical assembly uses various methods to mechanically attach two (or more) parts together. In most cases, the method involves the use of discrete hardware components, called fasteners, that are added to the parts during the assembly operation. In other cases, the method involves the shaping or reshaping of one of the components being assembled, and no separate fasteners are required. Many consumer products are produced using mechanical assembly: automobiles, large and small appliances, telephones, furniture, utensils—even wearing apparel is “assembled” by mechanical means. In addition, industrial products such as airplanes, machine tools, and construction equipment almost always involve mechanical assembly. Mechanical fastening methods can be divided into two major classes: (1) those that allow for disassembly, and (2) those that create a permanent joint. Threaded fasteners (e.g., screws, bolts, and nuts) are examples of the ﬁrst class, and rivets illustrate the second. There are good reasons why mechanical assembly is often preferred over other joining processes discussed in previous chapters.The main reasons are (1) ease of assembly and (2) ease of disassembly (for the fastening methods that permit disassembly). Mechanical assembly is usually accomplished by unskilled workers with a minimum of special tooling and in a relatively short time. The technology is simple, and the results are easily inspected. These factors are advantageous not only in the factory, but also during ﬁeld installation. Large products that are too big and heavy to be transported completely assembled can be shipped in smaller subassemblies and then put together at the customer’s site. Ease of disassembly applies, of course, only to the mechanical fastening methods that permit disassembly. Periodic disassembly is required for many products so that maintenance and repair can be performed; for example, to replace worn-out components, to make adjustments, and so forth. Permanent joining techniques such as welding do not allow for disassembly. For purposes of organization, mechanical assembly methods are divided into the following categories: (1) threaded fasteners, (2) rivets, (3) interference ﬁts, (4) other mechanical fastening methods, and (5) molded-in inserts and integral fasteners. These categories are described in Sections 31.1 through 31.5. Section 31.6 discusses the important topic of design for assembly.Assembly of electronic products includes mechanical techniques. However, electronics assembly represents a specialized ﬁeld, which is covered in Chapter 34. Threaded Fasteners Threaded fasteners are discrete hardware components that have external or internal threads for assembly of parts. In nearly all cases, they permit disassembly. Threaded fasteners are the most important category of mechanical assembly; the common threaded fastener types are screws, bolts, and nuts. 31.1.1 SCREWS, BOLTS, AND NUTS Screws and bolts are threaded fasteners that have external threads. There is a technical distinction between a screw and a bolt that is often blurred in popular usage. A screw is an externally threaded fastener that is generally assembled into a blind threaded hole. Some types, called self-tapping screws, possess geometries that permit them to form or cut the matching threads in the hole. A bolt is an externally threaded fastener that is inserted through holes in the parts and “screwed” into a nut on the opposite side. A nut is an internally threaded fastener having standard threads that match those on bolts of the same diameter, pitch, and thread form. The typical assemblies that result from the use of screws and bolts are illustrated in Figure 31.1. Screws and bolts come in a variety of standard sizes,threads,and shapes.Table 31.1 provides a selection of common threaded fastener sizes in metric units (ISO standard) and U.S. customary units (ANSI standard).1 The metric speciﬁcation consists of the nominal major diameter, mm, followed by the pitch, mm. For example, a speciﬁcation of 4 ! 0.7 means a 4.0-mm major diameter and a pitch of 0.7 mm. The U.S. standard speciﬁes either a number designating the major diameter (up to 0.2160 in) or the nominal major diameter, in, followed by the number of threads per inch. For example, the speciﬁcation 1/4-20 indicates a major diameter of 0.25 in and 20 threads per inch. Both coarse pitch and ﬁne pitch standards are given in Table 31.1. FIGURE 31.1 Typical assemblies using(a) bolt and nut, and (b) screw. 1ISO is the abbreviation for the International Standards Organization. ANSI is the abbreviation for the American National Standards Institute. TABLE • 31.1 Selected standard threaded fastener sizes in metric and U.S. customary units. ISO (Metric) Standard ANSI (U.S.C.S) Standard Nominal Threads/ Diameter, Coarse Pitch, Fine Pitch, Major in, Coarse Threads/in, mm mm mm Nominal Size Diameter, in (UNC)a Fine (UNF)a 2 0.4 2 0.086 56 64 3 0.5 4 0.112 40 48 4 0.7 6 0.138 32 40 5 0.8 8 0.164 32 36 6 1.0 10 0.190 24 32 8 1.25 12 0.216 24 28 10 1.5 1.25 1/4 0.250 20 28 12 1.75 1.25 3/8 0.375 16 24 16 2.0 1.5 1/2 0.500 13 20 20 2.5 1.5 5/8 0.625 11 18 24 3.0 2.0 3/4 0.750 10 16 30 3.5 2.0 1 1.000 8 12 a UNC stands for uniﬁed coarse in the ANSI standard, and UNF stands for uniﬁed ﬁne. Additional technical data on these and other standard threaded fastener sizes can be found in design texts and handbooks. The United States has been gradually converting to metric thread sizes, which will reduce proliferation of speciﬁcations. It should be noted that differences among threaded fasteners have tooling implications in manufacturing. To use a particular type of screw or bolt, the assembly worker must have tools that are designed for that fastener type. For example, there are numerous head styles available on bolts and screws, the most common of which are shown in Figure 31.2. The geometries of these heads, as well as the variety of sizes available, require different hand tools (e.g., screwdrivers) for the worker. One cannot turn a hexhead bolt with a conventional ﬂat-blade screwdriver. Screws come in a greater variety of conﬁgurations than bolts, since their functions vary more. The types include machine screws, capscrews, setscrews, and self-tapping screws. Machine screws are the generic type, designed for assembly into tapped holes. They are sometimes assembled to nuts, and in this usage they overlap with bolts. Capscrews have the same geometry as machine screws but are made of higher strength metals and to closer tolerances. Setscrews are hardened and designed for FIGURE 31.3 (a) Assembly of collar to shaft using a setscrew; (b) various setscrew geometries (head types and points). FIGURE 31.4 Self-tapping screws:(a) thread-forming and(b) thread-cutting. assembly functions such as fastening collars, gears, and pulleys to shafts as shown in Figure 31.3(a). They come in various geometries, some of which are illustrated in Figure 31.3(b). A self-tapping screw (also called a tapping screw) is designed to form or cut threads in a preexisting hole into which it is being turned. Figure 31.4 shows two of the typical thread geometries for self-tapping screws. Most threaded fasteners are produced by cold forming (Section 18.2). Some are machined (Sections 21.2.2 and 21.7.1), but this is usually a more expensive thread-making process. A variety of materials are used to make threaded fasteners, steels being the most common because of their good strength and low cost. These include low and medium carbon as well as alloy steels. Fasteners made of steel are usually plated or coated for superﬁcial resistance to corrosion. Nickel, chromium, zinc, black oxide, and similar coatings are used for this purpose. When corrosion or other factors deny the use of steel fasteners, other materials must be used, including stainless steels, aluminum alloys, nickel alloys, and plastics (however, plastics are suited to low stress applications only). 31.1.2 OTHER THREADED FASTENERS AND RELATED HARDWARE Additional threaded fasteners and related hardware include studs, screw thread inserts, captive threaded fasteners, and washers. A stud (in the context of fasteners) is an externally threaded fastener, but without the usual head possessed by a bolt. Studs can be used to assemble two parts using two nuts as shown in Figure 31.5(a). They are available with threads on one end or both as in Figure 31.5(b) and (c). Screw thread inserts are internally threaded plugs or wire coils made to be inserted into an unthreaded hole and to accept an externally threaded fastener. They are assembled into weaker materials (e.g., plastic, wood, and light-weight metals such as magnesium) to provide strong threads. There are many designs of screw thread inserts, one example of which is illustrated in Figure 31.6. Upon subsequent assembly FIGURE 31.5 (a) Stud and nuts used for assembly. Other stud types: (b) threadson one end only, and (c) double-end stud. FIGURE 31.6 Screw thread inserts: (a) before insertion, and (b) after insertioninto hole and screw is turned into the insert. of the screw into the insert, the insert barrel expands into the sides of the hole, securing the assembly. Captive threaded fasteners are threaded fasteners that have been permanently preassembled to one of the parts to be joined. Possible preassembly processes include welding, brazing, press ﬁtting, or cold forming. Two types of captive threaded fasteners are illustrated in Figure 31.7. A washer is a hardware component often used with threaded fasteners to ensure tightness of the mechanical joint; in its simplest form, it is a ﬂat, thin ring of sheet metal.Washers serve various functions.They (1) distribute stresses that might otherwise be concentrated at the bolt or screw head and nut, (2) provide support for large clearance holes in the assembled parts, (3) increase spring tension, (4) protect part surfaces, (5) seal the joint, and (6) resist inadvertent unfastening [13]. Three washer types are illustrated in Figure 31.8. 31.1.3 STRESSES AND STRENGTHS IN BOLTED JOINTS Typical stresses acting on a bolted or screwed joint include both tensile and shear, as depicted in Figure 31.9. Shown in the ﬁgure is a bolt-and-nut assembly. Once tightened, the bolt is loaded in tension, and the parts are loaded in compression. In addition, forces may be acting in opposite directions on the parts, which results in a shear stress on the bolt cross section. Finally, there are stresses applied on the threads throughout their engagement length with the nut in a direction parallel to FIGURE 31.7 Captive threaded fasteners: (a) weld nut, and (b) riveted nut. FIGURE 31.8 Types of washers: (a) plain (ﬂat) washers; (b) springwashers, used to dampen vibration orcompensate for wear;and (c) lockwasherdesigned to resistloosening of the bolt or screw. FIGURE 31.9 Typical stresses acting on a bolted joint. TABLE • 31.2 Typical values of tensile and proof strengths for steel bolts and screws, diameters range from 6.4 mm (0.25 in) to 38 mm (1.50 in). Proof Stress Tensile Stress Material MPa lb/in2 MPa lb/in2 Low/medium C steel 228 33,000 414 60,000 Alloy steel 830 120,000 1030 150,000 Source: [13]. the axis of the bolt.These shear stresses can cause stripping of the threads, which can also occur on the internal threads of the nut. The strength of a threaded fastener is generally speciﬁed by two measures: (1) tensile strength, which has the traditional deﬁnition (Section 3.1.1), and (2) proof strength. Proof strength is roughly equivalent to yield strength; speciﬁcally, it is the maximum tensile stress to which an externally threaded fastener can be subjected without permanent deformation. Typical values of tensile and proof strength for steel bolts are given in Table 31.2. The problem that can arise during assembly is that the threaded fasteners are overtightened, causing stresses that exceed the strength of the fastener material. Assuming a bolt-and-nut assembly as shown in Figure 31.9, failure can occur in one of the following ways: (1) external threads (e.g., bolt or screw) can strip, (2) internal threads (e.g., nut) can strip, or (3) the bolt can break because of excessive tensile stresses on its cross-sectional area. Thread stripping, failures (1) and (2), is a shear failure and occurs when the length of engagement is too short (less than about 60% of the nominal bolt diameter). This can be avoided by providing adequate thread engagement in the fastener design. Tensile failure (3) is the most common problem. The bolt breaks at about 85% of its rated tensile strength because of combined tensile and torsion stresses during tightening [2]. The tensile stress to which a bolt is subjected can be calculated as the tensile load applied to the joint divided by the applicable area: ___ F s " (31.1)As where s  stress, MPa (lb/in2); F  load, N (lb); and As  tensile stress area, mm2 (in2). This stress is compared to the bolt strength values listed in Table 31.2. The tensile stress area for a threaded fastener is the cross-sectional area of the minor diameter. This area can be calculated directly from one of the following equations [2], depending on whether the bolt is metric standard or American standard. For the metric standard (ISO), the formula is As " __p (D0.9382p)2 (31.2)4 where D " nominal size (basic major diameter) of the bolt or screw, mm; and p  thread pitch, mm. For the American standard (ANSI), the formula is 0.9743" __pAs ( D# n )2 (31.3)4 where D  nominal size (basic major diameter) of the bolt or screw, in; and n  the number of threads per inch. 31.1.4 TOOLS AND METHODS FOR THREADED FASTENERS The basic function of the tools and methods for assembling threaded fasteners is to provide relative rotation between the external and internal threads, and to apply sufﬁcient torque to secure the assembly. Available tools range from simple hand-held screwdrivers or wrenches to powered tools with sophisticated electronic sensors to ensure proper tightening. It is important that the tool match the screw or bolt and/ or the nut in style and size, since there are so many heads available. Hand tools are usually made with a single point or blade, but powered tools are generally designed to use interchangeable bits. The powered tools operate by pneumatic, hydraulic, or electric power. Whether a threaded fastener serves its intended purpose depends to a large degree on the amount of torque applied to tighten it. Once the bolt or screw (or nut) has been rotated until it is seated against the part surface, additional tightening will increase the tension in the fastener (and simultaneously the compression in the parts being held together); and the tightening will be resisted by an increasing torque. Thus, there is a correlation between the torque required to tighten the fastener and the tensile stress experienced by it. To achieve the desired function in the assembled joint (e.g., to improve fatigue resistance) and to lock the threaded fasteners, the product designer will often specify the tension force that should be applied. This force is called the preload. The following relationship can be used to determine the required torque to obtain a speciﬁed preload [13]: T " CtDF (31.4) where T " torque, N-mm (lb-in); Ct " the torque coefﬁcient whose value typically ranges between 0.15 and 0.25, depending on the thread surface conditions; D " nominal bolt or screw diameter, mm (in); and F " speciﬁed preload tension force, N (lb). A Metric 8  1.25 bolt must be tightened to a preload of 275 N. The torque coefﬁcient  0.22. Determine (a) the required torque that will achieve the speciﬁed preload, and (b) the stress on the bolt when preloaded. Solution: Using Equation 31.4, the required torque T  0.22(8)(275)  484 N-mm " 0.484 N-m (b) The area of the minor diameter of the bolt is obtained using Equation 31.2: " __p __As (D0.9382p)2 " p (80.9382(1.25))236.6 mm2 44 275 s " F/As  7.51 N/mm2  7.51 MPa 36.6 Various methods are used to apply the required torque, including (1) operator feel—not very accurate, but adequate for most assemblies; (2) torque wrenches, which measure the torque as the fastener is being turned; (3) stall-motors, which are motorized wrenches designed to stall when the required torque is reached; and (4) torque-turn tightening, in which the fastener is initially tightened to a low torque level and then rotated a speciﬁed additional amount (e.g., a quarter turn). Rivets and Eyelets Rivets are widely used for achieving a permanent mechanically fastened joint. Riveting is a fastening method that offers high production rates, simplicity, dependability, and low cost. Despite these apparent advantages, its applications have declined in recent decades in favor of threaded fasteners, welding, and adhesive bonding. Riveting is one of the primary fastening processes in the aircraft and aerospace industries for joining skins to channels and other structural members. A rivet is an unthreaded, headed pin used to join two (or more) parts by passing the pin through holes in the parts and then forming (upsetting) a second head in the pin on the opposite side. The deforming operation can be performed hot or cold (hot working or cold working), and by hammering or steady pressing. Once the rivet has been deformed, it cannot be removed except by breaking one of the heads. Rivets are speciﬁ ed by their length, diameter, head, and type. Rivet type refers to ﬁ ve basic geometries that affect how the rivet will be upset to form the second head.The ﬁve types are deﬁned in Figure 31.10. In addition, there are special rivets for special applications. Rivets are used primarily for lap joints. The clearance hole into which the rivet is inserted must be close to the diameter of the rivet. If the hole is too small, rivet insertion will be difﬁcult, thus reducing production rate. If the hole is too large, the rivet will not ﬁll the hole and may bend or compress during formation of the opposite head. Rivet design tables are available to specify the optimum hole sizes. The tooling and methods used in riveting can be divided into the following categories: (1) impact, in which a pneumatic hammer delivers a succession of blows to upset the rivet; (2) steady compression, in which the riveting tool applies a continuous squeezing pressure to upset the rivet; and (3) a combination of impact and compression. Much of the equipment used in riveting is portable and manually operated. Automatic drilling-and-riveting machines are available for drilling the holes and then inserting and upsetting the rivets. Eyelets are thin-walled, tubular fasteners with a ﬂ ange on one end, usually made from sheet metal, as in Figure 31.11(a). They are used to produce a permanent lap joint between two (or more) ﬂ at parts. Eyelets are substituted for rivets in low-stress applications to save material, weight, and cost. During fastening, the eyelet is inserted through the part holes, and the straight end is formed over to secure the assembly. FIGURE 31.10 Five basic rivet types,also shown in assembled conﬁguration: (a) solid, (b) tubular, (c) semitubular, (d) bifurcated, and (e) compression. FIGURE 31.11 Fastening with an eyelet: (a) the eyelet, and (b) assembly sequence: (1) inserting the eyelet through the hole, and (2) setting operation. The forming operation is called setting and is performed by opposing tools that hold the eyelet in position and curl the extended portion of its barrel. Figure 31.11(b) illustrates the sequence for a typical eyelet design. Applications of this fastening method include automotive subassemblies, electrical components, toys, and apparel. Assembly Methods Based on Interference Fits Several assembly methods are based on mechanical interference between the two mating parts being joined. This interference, which occurs either during assembly or after the parts are joined,holds the parts together.The methods include press ﬁtting, shrink and expansion ﬁts, snap ﬁts, and retaining rings. Press Fitting A press ﬁt assembly is one in which the two components have an interference ﬁt between them. The typical case is where a pin (e.g., a straight cylindrical pin) of a certain diameter is pressed into a hole of a slightly smaller diameter. Standard pin sizes are commercially available to accomplish a variety of functions, such as (1) locating and locking the components—used to augment threaded fasteners by holding two (or more) parts in ﬁxed alignment with each other; (2) pivot points, to permit rotation of one component about the other; and (3) shear pins. Except for (3), the pins are normally hardened. Shear pins are made of softer metals so as to break under a sudden or severe shearing load to save the rest of the assembly. Other applications of press ﬁtting include assembly of collars, gears, pulleys, and similar components onto shafts. The pressures and stresses in an interference ﬁt can be estimated using several applicable formulas. If the ﬁt consists of a round solid pin or shaft inside a collar (or similar component), as depicted in Figure 31.12, and the components are made of the same material, the radial pressure between the pin and the collar can be determined by [13]: Ei(Dc 2 # D2 p)Pf " DpDc 2 (31.5) FIGURE 31.12 Cross section of a solid pin or shaft assembled to a collar by interference ﬁ t. where pf " radial or interference ﬁt pressure, MPa (lb/in2); E " modulus of elasticity for the material; i " interference between the pin (or shaft) and the collar; that is, the starting difference between the inside diameter of the collar hole and the outside diameter of the pin, mm (in); Dc " outside diameter of the collar, mm (in); and Dp " pin or shaft diameter, mm (in). The maximum effective stress occurs in the collar at its inside diameter and can be calculated as 22pf DcMax se " 22 (31.6)DcDp where Max se " the maximum effective stress, MPa (lb/in2), and pf is the interference ﬁt pressure computed from Equation (31.5). In situations in which a straight pin or shaft is pressed into the hole of a large part with geometry other than that of a collar, the previous equations can be simpliﬁed by taking the outside diameter Dc to be inﬁnite, thus reducing the equation for interference pressure to  Eipf ___ " Dp  (31.7)  and the corresponding maximum effective stress becomes  Max se  2pf  (31.8)  In most cases, particularly for ductile metals, the maximum effective stress should be compared with the yield strength of the material, applying an appropriate safety factor, as in the following: YMax se $ (31.9)SF where Y  yield strength of the material, and SF is the applicable safety factor. Various pin geometries are available for interference ﬁts. The basic type is a straight pin, usually made from cold-drawn carbon steel wire or bar stock, ranging in diameter from 1.6 to 25 mm (1/16–1.0 in). They are unground, with chamfered or square ends (chamfered ends facilitate press ﬁtting). Dowel pins are manufactured to more precise speciﬁcations than straight pins, and can be ground and hardened. They are used to ﬁx the alignment of assembled components in dies, ﬁxtures, and machinery. Taper pins possess a taper of 6.4 mm (0.25 in) per foot and are driven into the hole to establish a ﬁxed relative position between the parts.Their advantage is that they can be driven readily back out of the hole. Additional pin geometries are commercially available, including grooved pins— solid straight pins with three longitudinal grooves in which the metal is raised on either side of each groove to cause interference when the pin is pressed into a hole; knurled pins, pins with a knurled pattern that causes interference in the mating hole; and coiled pins, also called spiral pins, which are made by rolling strip stock into a coiled spring. Shrink and Expansion Fits These terms refer to the assembly of two parts that have an interference ﬁt at room temperature. The typical case is a cylindrical pin or shaft assembled into a collar. To assemble by shrink ﬁ tting, the external part is heated to enlarge it by thermal expansion, and the internal part either remains at room temperature or is cooled to contract its size. The parts are then assembled and brought back to room temperature, so that the external part shrinks, and if previously cooled the internal part expands, to form a strong interference ﬁt. An expansion ﬁ t is when only the internal part is cooled to contract it for assembly; once inserted into the mating component, it warms to room temperature, expanding to create the interference assembly.These assembly methods are used to ﬁt gears,pulleys,sleeves, and other components onto solid and hollow shafts. Various methods are used to heat and/or cool the work parts. Heating equipment includes torches, furnaces, electric resistance heaters, and electric induction heaters. Cooling methods include conventional refrigeration, packing in dry ice, and immersion in cold liquids, including liquid nitrogen. The resulting change in diameter depends on the coefﬁcient of thermal expansion and the temperature difference that is applied to the part. If it is assumed that the heating or cooling has produced a uniform temperature throughout the work, then the change in diameter is given by D2D1 " a D1(T2T1) (31.10) where a " the coefﬁcient of linear thermal expansion, mm/mm-°C (in/in-°F) for the material (see Table 4.1); T2 " the temperature to which the parts have been heated or cooled, °C (°F); T1 " starting ambient temperature; D2 " diameter of the part at T2, mm (in); and D1  diameter of the part at T1. Equations (31.5) through (31.9) for computing interference pressures and effective stresses can be used to determine the corresponding values for shrink and expansion ﬁts. An alloy steel shaft is to be inserted into a collar of the same metal using an expansion ﬁt. At room temperature (20°C), the outer and inner diameters of the collar " 50.00 mm and 30.00 mm, respectively, and the shaft has a diameter " 30.015 mm. The shaft must be reduced in size for assembly into the collar by cooling to a sufﬁciently low temperature that there is a clearance of 0.03 mm. Determine (a) the temperature to which the shaft must be cooled for assembly, (b) the radial pressure at room temperature after assembly, and (c) the maximum effective stress on the collar. Solution: (a) From Table 4.1, the coefﬁcient of thermal expansion for steel a  12(106) C1. Rearranging Equation 31.10 to solve for the cooling temperature, (D2 # D1) (30.00  0.03)30.015 T2 & T1  20 124.9  20 " 104.9C a D1 12(106)(30.015) (b) From Table 3.1, the modulus of elasticity for steel E  209(103) MPa. Using Equation (31.5) to solve for radial pressure, where Dc  50.00 mm and Dp  30.025 mm Ei(Dc 2 # D2 p) 209(103)(0.015)(50230.0152)Pf " " 66.8 MPa DpDc 2 30.015(502) (c) The maximum effective stress is given by Equation 31.8: 2pf Dc2 2(66.8)(502)Max se " 22 " 209 MPa DcDp (50230.0152) Snap Fits and Retaining Rings Snap ﬁts are a variation of interference ﬁ ts. A snap ﬁ t involves joining two parts in which the mating elements possess a temporary interference while being pressed together, but once assembled they interlock to maintain the assembly. A typical example is shown in Figure 31.13: as the parts are pressed together, the mating elements elastically deform to accommodate the interference, subsequently allowing the parts to snap together; once in position, the elements become connected mechanically so that they cannot easily be disassembled. The parts are usually designed so that a slight interference exists after assembly. Advantages of snap ﬁt assembly include (1) the parts can be designed with self-aligning features, (2) no special tooling is required, and (3) assembly can be accomplished very quickly. Snap ﬁtting was originally conceived as a method that would be ideally suited to industrial robotics applications; however, it is no surprise that assembly techniques that are easier for robots are also easier for human assembly workers. FIGURE 31.14 Retaining ring assembled into a groove on ashaft. A retaining ring, also known as a snap ring, is a fastener that snaps into a circumferential groove on a shaft or tube to form a shoulder,as in Figure 31.14.The assembly can be used to locate or restrict the movement of parts mounted on the shaft. Retaining rings are available for both external (shaft) and internal (bore) applications.They are made from either sheet metal or wire stock, heat treated for hardness and stiffness.To assemble a retaining ring,a special pliers tool is used to elastically deform the ring so that it ﬁts over the shaft (or into the bore) and then is released into the groove. Other Mechanical Fastening Methods In addition to the mechanical assembly techniques discussed above, there are several additional methods that involve the use of fasteners. These include stitching, stapling, sewing, and cotter pins. Stitching, Stapling, and Sewing Industrial stitching and stapling are similar operations involving the use of U-shaped metal fasteners. Stitching is a fastening operation in which a stitching machine is used to form the U-shaped stitches one at a time from steel wire and immediately drive them through the two parts to be joined. Figure 31.15 illustrates several types of wire stitches. The parts to be joined must be relatively thin, consistent with the stitch size, and the assembly can involve various combinations of metal and nonmetal materials. Applications of industrial stitching include light sheet-metal assembly, metal hinges, electrical connections, magazine binding, corrugated boxes, and ﬁnal product packaging. Conditions that favor stitching in these applications are (1) high-speed operation, (2) elimination of the need for prefabricated holes in the parts, and (3) desirability of using fasteners that encircle the parts. In stapling, preformed U-shaped staples are punched through the two parts to be attached. The staples are supplied in convenient strips. The individual staples are lightly stuck together to form the strip, but they can be separated by the stapling tool for driving.The staples come with various point styles to facilitate their entry into the work. Staples are usually applied by means of portable pneumatic guns, into which strips containing several hundred staples can be loaded.Applications of industrial stapling include: furniture and upholstery, assembly of car seats, and various light-gage sheet-metal and plastic assembly jobs. Sewing is a common joining method for soft, ﬂ exible parts such as cloth and leather. The method involves the use of a long thread or cord interwoven with the FIGURE 31.15 Common types of wirestitches: (a) unclinched,(b) standard loop,(c) bypass loop, and(d) ﬂat clinch. FIGURE 31.16 Cotter pins: (a) offsethead, standard point;(b) symmetric head,hammerlock point;(c) square point;(d) mitered point; and(e) chisel point. parts so as to produce a continuous seam between them.The process is widely used in the needle trades industry for assembling garments. Cotter Pins Cotter pins are fasteners formed from half-round wire into a single two-stem pin, as in Figure 31.16. They vary in diameter, ranging between 0.8 mm (0.031 in) and 19 mm (3/4 in), and in point style, several of which are shown in the ﬁgure. Cotter pins are inserted into holes in the mating parts and their legs are split to lock the assembly.They are used to secure parts onto shafts and similar applications. Molding Inserts and Integral Fasteners These assembly methods form a permanent joint between parts by shaping or reshaping one of the components through a manufacturing process such as casting, molding, or sheet-metal forming. Inserts in Moldings and Castings This method involves the placement of a component into a mold prior to plastic molding or metal casting, so that it becomes a permanent and integral part of the molding or casting. Inserting a separate component is preferable to molding or casting its shape if the superior properties (e.g., strength) of the insert material are required, or the geometry achieved through the use of the insert is too complex or intricate to incorporate into the mold. Examples of inserts in molded or cast parts include internally threaded bushings and nuts, externally threaded studs, bearings, and electrical contacts. Some of these are illustrated in Figure 31.17. Internally threaded inserts must be placed into the mold with threaded pins to prevent the molding material from ﬂowing into the threaded hole. Placing inserts into a mold has certain disadvantages in production: (1) design of the mold becomes more complicated; (2) handling and placing the insert into the cavity takes time that reduces production rate; and (3) inserts introduce a foreign material into the casting or molding, and in the event of a defect, the cast metal or plastic cannot be easily reclaimed and recycled. Despite these disadvantages, use of inserts is often the most functional design and least-cost production method. Integral Fasteners Integral fasteners involve deformation of component parts so they interlock and create a mechanically fastened joint. This assembly method is most common for sheet-metal parts. The possibilities, Figure 31.18, include (a) lanced tabs to attach wires or shafts to sheet-metal parts; (b) embossed protrusions, FIGURE 31.17 Examples of molded-ininserts: (a) threadedbushing, and(b) threaded stud. FIGURE 31.18 Integral fasteners: (a) lanced tabs to attach wires or shafts to sheetmetal, (b) embossed protrusions,similar to riveting, (c) single-lock seaming, (d) beading, and (e) dimpling. Numbers in parentheses indicate sequencein (b), (c), and (d). in which bosses are formed in one part and ﬂattened over the mating assembled part; (c) seaming, where the edges of two separate sheet-metal parts or the opposite edges of the same part are bent over to form the fastening seam—the metal must be ductile in order for the bending to be feasible; (d) beading, in which a tube-shaped part is attached to a smaller shaft (or other round part) by deforming the outer diameter inward to cause an interference around the entire circumference; and (e) dimpling— forming of simple round indentations in an outer part to retain an inner part. Crimping, in which the edges of one part are deformed over a mating component, is another example of integral assembly.A common example involves squeezing the barrel of an electrical terminal onto a wire (Section 34.5.1). Design for Assembly Design for assembly (DFA) has received much attention in recent years because assembly operations constitute a high labor cost for many manufacturing companies. The key to successful design for assembly can be simply stated [3]: (1) design the product with as few parts as possible, and (2) design the remaining parts so they are easy to assemble. The cost of assembly is determined largely during product design, because that is when the number of separate components in the product is determined, and decisions are made about how these components will be assembled. Once these decisions have been made, there is little that can be done in manufacturing to inﬂuence assembly costs (except, of course, to manage the operations well). This section considers some of the principles that can be applied during product design to facilitate assembly. Most of the principles have been developed in the context of mechanical assembly, although some of them apply to the other assembly and joining processes. Much of the research in design for assembly has been motivated by the increasing use of automated assembly systems in industry. Accordingly, our discussion is divided into two sections, the ﬁrst dealing with general principles of DFA, and the second concerned speciﬁcally with design for automated assembly. 31.6.1 GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF DFA Most of the general principles apply to both manual and automated assembly. Their goal is to achieve the required design function by the simplest and lowest cost means. The following recommendations have been compiled from [1], [3], [4], and [6]: ➢ Use the fewest number of parts possible to reduce the amount of assembly required. This principle is implemented by combining functions within the same part that might otherwise be accomplished by separate components (e.g., using a plastic molded part instead of an assembly of sheet metal parts). ➢ Reduce the number of threaded fasteners required. Instead of using separate threaded fasteners, design the component to utilize snap ﬁts, retaining rings, integral fasteners, and similar fastening mechanisms that can be accomplished more rapidly. Use threaded fasteners only where justiﬁed (e.g., where disassembly or adjustment is required). ➢ Standardize fasteners. This is intended to reduce the number of sizes and styles of fasteners required in the product. Ordering and inventory problems are reduced, the assembly worker does not have to distinguish between so many FIGURE 31.19 Symmetrical parts are generally easier to insert and assemble: (a) only one rotational orientation possible for insertion; (b) two possible orientations; (c) four possible orientations; and (d) inﬁnite rotational orientations. FIGURE 31.20 (a) Parts that tend to tangle, and (b) partsdesigned to avoidtangling. separate fasteners, the workstation is simpliﬁed, and the variety of separate fastening tools is reduced. ➢ Reduce parts orientation difﬁ culties . Orientation problems are generally reduced by designing a part to be symmetrical and minimizing the number of asymmetric features. This allows easier handling and insertion during assembly. This principle is illustrated in Figure 31.19. ➢ Avoid parts that tangle . Certain part conﬁgurations are more likely to become entangled in parts bins, frustrating assembly workers or jamming automatic feeders. Parts with hooks, holes, slots, and curls exhibit more of this tendency than parts without these features (see Figure 31.20). 31.6.2 DESIGN FOR AUTOMATED ASSEMBLY Methods suitable for manual assembly are not necessarily the best methods for automated assembly. Some assembly operations readily performed by a human worker are quite difﬁ cult to automate (e.g., assembly using bolts and nuts). To automate the assembly process, parts fastening methods must be speciﬁed during product design that lend themselves to machine insertion and joining techniques and do not require the senses, dexterity, and intelligence of human assembly workers. Following are some recommendations and principles that can be applied in product design to facilitate automated assembly [6], [10]: ➢ Use modularity in product design . Increasing the number of separate tasks that are accomplished by an automated assembly system will reduce the reliability of the system.To alleviate the reliability problem,Riley [10] suggests that the design of the product be modular in which each module or subassembly has a maximum of 12 or 13 parts to be produced on a single assembly system. Also, the subassembly should be designed around a base part to which other components are added. ➢ Reduce the need for multiple components to be handled at once . The preferred practice for automated assembly is to separate the operations at different stations rather than to simultaneously handle and fasten multiple components at the same workstation. ➢ Limit the required directions of access. This means that the number of directions in which new components are added to the existing subassembly should be minimized. Ideally, all components should be added vertically from above, if possible. ➢ High-quality components. High performance of an automated assembly system requires that consistently good-quality components are added at each workstation. Poor quality components cause jams in feeding and assembly mechanisms that result in downtime. ➢ Use of snap ﬁ t assembly. This eliminates the need for threaded fasteners; assembly is by simple insertion, usually from above. It requires that the parts be designed with special positive and negative features to facilitate insertion and fastening. [1] Andreasen, M., Kahler, S., and Lund, T. Design for Assembly. Springer-Verlag, New York, 1988. [2] Blake, A. What Every Engineer Should Know About Threaded Fasteners. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1986. [3] Boothroyd, G., Dewhurst, P., and Knight, W. Product Design for Manufacture and Assembly. 3rd ed. CRC Taylor & Francis, Boca Raton, Florida, 2010. [4] Bralla, J. G. (ed.). Design for Manufacturability Handbook, 2nd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1998. [5] Dewhurst, P., and Boothroyd, G. “Design for Assembly in Action,” Assembly Engineering, January 1987, pp. 64–68. [6] Groover, M. P. Automation, Production Systems, and Computer Integrated Manufacturing, 3rd ed. Pearson Prentice-Hall, Upper Saddle River, New Jersey, 2008. [7] Groover, M. P., Weiss, M., Nagel, R. N., and Odrey, N. G. Industrial Robotics: Technology, Programming, and Applications. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1986. [8] Nof, S. Y., Wilhelm, W. E., and Warnecke, H-J. Industrial Assembly. Chapman & Hall, New York, 1997. [9] Parmley, R. O. (ed.). Standard Handbook of Fastening and Joining, 3rd ed. McGraw-Hill, New York, 1997. [10] Riley, F. J. Assembly Automation, A Management Handbook, 2nd ed. Industrial Press, New York, 1999. [11] Speck, J. A. Mechanical Fastening, Joining, and Assembly. Marcel Dekker, New York, 1997. [12] Whitney, D. E. Mechanical Assemblies. Oxford University Press, New York, 2004. [13] Wick, C., and Veilleux, R. F. (eds.). Tool and Manufacturing Engineers Handbook, 4th ed., Vol. IV, Quality Control and Assembly. Society of Manufacturing Engineers, Dearborn, Michigan, 1987. 