CompositeMaterials Chapter Contents 9.1 Technology and Classiﬁcation of Composite Materials 9.1.1 Components in a Composite Material 9.1.2 The Reinforcing Phase 9.1.3 Properties of Composite Materials 9.1.4 Other Composite Structures 9.2 Metal Matrix Composites 9.2.1 Cermets 9.2.2 Fiber-Reinforced Metal Matrix Composites 9.3 Ceramic Matrix Composites 9.4 Polymer Matrix Composites 9.4.1 Fiber-Reinforced Polymers 9.4.2 Other Polymer Matrix Composites In addition to metals, ceramics, and polymers, a fourth material category can be distinguished: composites. A composite material is a material system composed of two or more physically distinct phases whose combination produces aggregate properties that are different from those of its constituents. In certain respects, composites are the most interesting of the engineering materials because their structure is more complex than the other three types. The technological and commercial interest in composite materials derives from the fact that their properties are not just different from their components but are often far superior. Some of the possibilities include: ➢ Composites can be designed that are very strong and stiff, yet very light in weight, giving them strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios several times greater than steel or aluminum.These properties are highly desirable in applications ranging from commercial aircraft to sports equipment. ➢ Fatigue properties are generally better than for the common engineering metals. Toughness is often greater, too. ➢ Composites can be designed that do not corrode like steel; this is important in automotive and other applications. ➢ With composite materials, it is possible to achieve combinations of properties not attainable with metals, ceramics, or polymers alone. ➢ Better appearance and control of surface smoothness are possible with certain composite materials. Along with the advantages, there are disadvantages and limitations associated with composite materials. These include: (1) properties of many important composites are anisotropic, which means the properties differ depending on the direction in which they are measured; (2) many of the polymer-based composites are subject to attack by chemicals or solvents, just as the polymers themselves are susceptible to attack; (3) composite materials are generally expensive, although prices may drop as volume increases; and (4) certain of the manufacturing methods for shaping composite materials are slow and costly. Several composite materials have already been encountered in the coverage of the three other material types. Examples include cemented carbides (tungsten carbide with cobalt binder); plastic molding compounds that contain ﬁllers (e.g., cellulose ﬁbers,wood ﬂour);and rubber mixed with carbon black.These materials are not always identiﬁed as composites; however, technically, they ﬁt the above deﬁnition. It could even be argued that a two-phase metal alloy (e.g., Fe  Fe3C) is a composite material, although it is not classiﬁed as such. Perhaps the most important composite material of all is wood. In discussing composite materials, the appropriate starting point is their technology and classiﬁcation. There are many different materials and structures that can be used to form composites. The various categories are discussed here, devoting the most time to ﬁber-reinforced plastics, which are commercially the most important type. Technology and Classiﬁcation of Composite Materials As noted in the deﬁnition, a composite material consists of two or more distinct phases. The term phase indicates a homogeneous material, such as a metal or ceramic in which all of the grains have the same crystal structure, or a polymer with no ﬁllers. By combining the phases, using methods yet to be described, a new material is created with aggregate performance exceeding that of its parts.The effect is synergistic. Composite materials can be classiﬁed in various ways. One possible classiﬁcation distinguishes between (1) traditional and (2) synthetic composites. Traditional composites are those that occur in nature or have been produced by civilizations for many years. Wood is a naturally occurring composite material, while concrete (Portland cement plus sand or gravel) and asphalt mixed with gravel are traditional composites used in construction. Synthetic composites are modern material systems normally associated with the manufacturing industries, in which the components are ﬁrst produced separately and then combined in a controlled way to achieve the desired structure,properties,and part geometry.These synthetic materials are the composites normally thought of in the context of engineered products, and this chapter is focused on these materials. 9.1.1 COMPONENTS IN A COMPOSITE MATERIAL In its simplest form, a composite material consists of two phases: a primary phase and a secondary phase. The primary phase is the matrix within which the secondary phase is imbedded. The imbedded phase is sometimes referred to as a reinforcing agent (or similar term), because it usually serves to strengthen the composite. The reinforcing phase may be in the form of ﬁbers, particles, or various other geometries. The phases are generally insoluble in each other, but strong adhesion must exist at their interface(s). The matrix phase can be any of three basic material types: polymers, metals, or ceramics. The secondary phase may also be one of the three basic materials, or TABLE • 9.1 Possible combinations of two-component composite materials. NA  not applicable currently. aCermets include cemented carbides. it may be an element such as carbon or boron. Possible combinations in a two-component composite material can be organized as a 3  4 chart, as in Table 9.1. Note that certain combinations are not feasible, such as a polymer in a ceramic matrix. Also note that the possibilities include two-phase structures consisting of components of the same material type, such as ﬁbers of Kevlar (polymer) in a plastic (polymer) matrix. In other composites the imbedded material is an element such as carbon or boron. The classiﬁcation system for composite materials used in this book is based on the matrix phase. The classes are listed here and discussed in Sections 9.2 through 9.4: 1. Metal Matrix Composites (MMCs) include mixtures of ceramics and metals, such as cemented carbides and other cermets, as well as aluminum or magnesium reinforced by strong, high stiffness ﬁbers. 2. Ceramic Matrix Composites (CMCs) are the least common category. Aluminum oxide and silicon carbide are materials that can be imbedded with ﬁbers for improved properties, especially in high temperature applications. 3. Polymer Matrix Composites (PMCs).Thermosetting resins are the most widely used polymers in PMCs. Epoxy and polyester are commonly mixed with ﬁber reinforcement, and phenolic is mixed with powders. Thermoplastic molding compounds are often reinforced, usually with powders (Section 8.1.5). The classiﬁcation can be applied to traditional composites as well as synthetics. Concrete is a ceramic matrix composite, while asphalt and wood are polymer matrix composites. The matrix material serves several functions in the composite. First, it provides the bulk form of the part or product made of the composite material. Second, it holds the imbedded phase in place, usually enclosing and often concealing it. Third, when a load is applied, the matrix shares the load with the secondary phase, in some cases deforming so that the stress is essentially born by the reinforcing agent. FIGURE 9.1 Possible physical shapes of 9.1.2 THE REINFORCING PHASE It is important to understand that the role played by the secondary phase is to reinforce the primary phase. The imbedded phase is most commonly one of the shapes illustrated in Figure 9.1: ﬁbers, particles, or ﬂakes. In addition, the secondary phase can take the form of an inﬁltrated phase in a skeletal or porous matrix. Fibers Fibers are ﬁlaments of reinforcing material, generally circular in cross-section, although alternative shapes are sometimes used (e.g., tubular, rectangular, hexagonal). Diameters range from less than 0.0025 mm (0.0001 in) to about 0.13 mm (0.005 in), depending on material. Fiber reinforcement provides the greatest opportunity for strength enhancement of composite structures. In ﬁber-reinforced composites, the ﬁber is often considered to be the principal constituent since it bears the major share of the load. Fibers are of interest as reinforcing agents because the ﬁlament form of most materials is signiﬁ cantly stronger than the bulk form. The effect of ﬁber diameter on tensile strength can be seen in Figure 9.2. As diameter is reduced, the material becomes oriented in the direction of the ﬁber axis and the probability of defects in the structure decreases signiﬁcantly. As a result, tensile strength increases dramatically. Fibers used in composites can be either continuous or discontinuous. Continuous ﬁ bers are very long; in theory, they offer a continuous path by which a load can be carried by the composite part. In reality, this is difﬁ cult to achieve due to variations in the ﬁbrous material and processing. Discontinuous ﬁ bers (chopped sections of continuous ﬁbers) are short lengths (L/D  100). An important type of discontinuous ﬁ ber are whiskers—hair-like single crystals with diameters down to about 0.001 mm (0.00004 in) and very high strength. Fiber diameter, in. 0.0003 0.0004 0.0005 3000 0.006 0.008 400 2500 300 2000 Tensile strength, 1000 lb/in.2 Tensile strength, MPa FIGURE 9.2 Relationshipbetween tensile strength anddiameter for a carbon ﬁber 1500 200 (Source: [1]). Other ﬁlament materials show similar relationships. Fiber diameter, mm Fiber orientation is another factor in composite parts. Three cases can be distinguished, illustrated in Figure 9.3: (a) one-dimensional reinforcement, in which maximum strength and stiffness are obtained in the direction of the ﬁber; (b) planar reinforcement, in some cases in the form of a two-dimensional woven fabric; and (c) random or three-dimensional in which the composite material tends to possess isotropic properties. Various materials are used as ﬁbers in ﬁber-reinforced composites: metals, ceramics, polymers, carbon, and boron. The most important commercial use of ﬁbers is in polymer composites. However, use of ﬁber-reinforced metals and ceramics is growing. Following is a survey of the important types of ﬁber materials, with properties listed in Table 9.2: ➢ Glass—The most widely used ﬁber in polymers, the term ﬁ berglass is applied to denote glass ﬁber-reinforced plastic (GFRP). The two common glass ﬁbers are E-glass and S-glass (compositions listed in Table 7.5). E-glass is strong and low cost, but its modulus is less than other ﬁbers. S-glass is stiffer, and its tensile strength is one of the highest of all ﬁber materials; however, it is more expensive than E-glass. ➢ Carbon—Carbon (Section 7.5.1) can be made into high-modulus ﬁbers. Besides stiffness, other attractive properties include low-density and low-thermal TABLE • 9.2 Typical properties of ﬁber materials used as reinforcement in composites. Compiled from [3], [7], [11], and other sources. Note that strength depends on ﬁber diameter (Figure 9.2); the properties in this table must be interpreted accordingly. a1 mil  0.001 in. expansion. C-ﬁbers are generally a combination of graphite and amorphous carbon. ➢ Boron—Boron (Section 7.5.3) has a very high elastic modulus, but its high cost limits applications to aerospace components in which this property (and others) are critical. ➢ Kevlar 49—This is the most important polymer ﬁber; it is a highly crystalline aramid, a member of the polyamide family (Section 8.2.2). Its speciﬁc gravity is low, giving it one of the highest strength-to-weight ratios of all ﬁbers. ➢ Ceramics—Silicon carbide (SiC) and aluminum oxide (Al2O3) are the main ﬁber materials among ceramics. Both have high elastic moduli and can be used to strengthen low-density, low-modulus metals such as aluminum and magnesium. ➢ Metal—Steel ﬁlaments, both continuous and discontinuous, are used as reinforcing ﬁbers in plastics. Other metals are currently less common as reinforcing ﬁbers. Particles and Flakes A second common shape of the imbedded phase is particulate, ranging in size from microscopic to macroscopic. Particles are an important material form for metals and ceramics.The characterization and production of engineering powders are discussed in Chapters 15 and 16. The distribution of particles in the composite matrix is random, and therefore strength and other properties of the composite material are usually isotropic. The strengthening mechanism depends on particle size. The microscopic size is represented by very ﬁne powders (around 1 mm) distributed in the matrix in concentrations of 15% or less. The presence of these powders results in dispersion-hardening of the matrix, in which dislocation movement in the matrix material is restricted by the microscopic particles. In effect, the matrix itself is strengthened, and no signiﬁ cant portion of the applied load is carried by the particles. As particle size increases to the macroscopic range, and the proportion of imbedded material increases to 25% and more, the strengthening mechanism changes. In this case, the applied load is shared between the matrix and the imbedded phase. Strengthening occurs due to the load-carrying ability of the particles and the bonding of particles in the matrix. This form of composite strengthening occurs in cemented carbides,in which tungsten carbide (WC) is held in a cobalt (Co) binder.The proportion of WC in the Co matrix is typically 80% or more. Flakes are basically two-dimensional particles—small ﬂat platelets.Two examples of this shape are the minerals mica (silicate of K and Al) and talc (Mg3Si4O10(OH)2), used as reinforcing agents in plastics. They are generally lower cost materials than polymers, and they add strength and stiffness to plastic molding compounds. Platelet sizes are usually in the range 0.01–1 mm (0.0004–0.040 in) across the ﬂake, with a thickness of 0.001–0.005 mm (0.00004–0.00020 in). Inﬁltrated Phase The fourth form of imbedded phase occurs when the matrix has the form of a porous skeleton (like a sponge), and the second phase is simply a ﬁ ller. In this case, the imbedded phase assumes the shape of the pores in the matrix. Metallic ﬁllers are sometimes used to inﬁltrate the open porous structure of parts made by powder metallurgy techniques (Section 15.3.4), in effect creating a composite material. Oil-impregnated sintered PM components, such as bearings and gears, might be considered another example of this category. FIGURE 9.4 Interfaces and interphases between phases in a composite material: (a) direct bonding betweenprimary and secondary phases; (b) addition of a third ingredient to bond the primary and secondary phases and forman interphase; and (c) formation of an interphase by solution of the primary and secondary phases at their boundary. The Interface There is always an interface between constituent phases in a composite material. For the composite to operate effectively, the phases must bond where they join. In some cases, there is a direct bonding between the two ingredients, as suggested by Figure 9.4(a). In other cases, a third ingredient is added to promote bonding of the two primary phases. Called an interphase, this third ingredient can be thought of as an adhesive. An important example is the coating of glass ﬁbers to achieve adhesion with thermosetting resin in ﬁberglass-reinforced plastics. As illustrated in Figure 9.4(b), this case results in two interfaces, one on either boundary of the interphase. Finally, a third form of interface occurs when the two primary components are not completely insoluble in each other; in this case, the interphase is formed consisting of a solution of the phases, as in Figure 9.4(c). An example occurs in cemented carbides (Section 9.2.1); at the high sintering temperatures used on these materials, some solubility results at the boundaries to create an interphase. 9.1.3 PROPERTIES OF COMPOSITE MATERIALS In the selection of a composite material, an optimum combination of properties is usually being sought, rather than one particular property. For example, the fuselage and wings of an aircraft must be lightweight as well as strong, stiff, and tough. Finding a monolithic material that satisﬁes these requirements is difﬁcult. Several ﬁber-reinforced polymers possess this combination of properties. Another example is rubber. Natural rubber is a relatively weak material. In the early 1900s, it was discovered that by adding signiﬁcant amounts of carbon black (almost pure carbon) to natural rubber, its strength is increased dramatically. The two ingredients interact to provide a composite material that is signiﬁ cantly stronger than either one alone. Rubber, of course, must also be vulcanized to achieve full strength. Rubber itself is a useful additive in polystyrene (PS). One of the distinctive and disadvantageous properties of polystyrene is its brittleness. Although most other polymers have considerable ductility, PS has virtually none. Rubber (natural or synthetic) can be added in modest amounts (5–15%) to produce high-impact polystyrene, which has much superior toughness and impact strength. Properties of a composite material are determined by three factors: (1) the materials used as component phases in the composite, (2) the geometric shapes of the constituents and resulting structure of the composite system, and (3) the manner in which the phases interact with one another. Rule of Mixtures The properties of a composite material are a function of the starting materials. Certain properties of a composite material can be computed by means of a rule of mixtures, which involves calculating a weighted average of the constituent material properties. Density is an example of this averaging rule. The mass of a composite material is the sum of the masses of the matrix and reinforcing phases: mc  mm  mr (9.1) where m # mass, kg (lb); and the subscripts c, m, and r indicate composite, matrix, and reinforcing phases, respectively. Similarly, the volume of the composite is the sum of its constituents: Vc  Vm  Vr  V y (9.2) where V # volume, cm3 (in3). Vv is the volume of any voids in the composite (e.g., pores). The density of the composite is the mass divided by the volume. ___ mc mm ! mr rc # (9.3)Vc Vc Because the masses of the matrix and reinforcing phase are their respective densities multiplied by their volumes, mm # rm Vm and mr # rr Vr these terms can be substituted into Equation (9.3) so that rc  fm rm  fr rr (9.4) where fm # Vm Vc a nd fr # Vr Vc are simply the volume fractions of the matrix and reinforcing phases. Fiber-Reinforced Composites Determining mechanical properties of composites from constituent properties is usually more involved. The rule of mixtures can sometimes be used to estimate the modulus of elasticity of a ﬁber-reinforced composite made of continuous ﬁbers where Ec is measured in the longitudinal direction. The situation is depicted in Figure 9.5(a); it is assumed that the ﬁber material is much stiffer than the matrix and that the bonding between the two phases is secure. Under this model, the modulus of the composite can be predicted as follows: Ec  fm Em  fr Er (9.5) FIGURE 9.5 (a) Model of a ﬁber-reinforced composite material showing direction in which elastic modulus is being estimated by the rule of mixtures. (b) Stress–strain relationships for the composite material and its constituents. The ﬁber is stiff but brittle, while the matrix (commonly a polymer) is soft but ductile. The composite’s modulus is a weighted average of its components’ moduli. But when the reinforcing ﬁbers fail, the composite does likewise. where Ec, Em, and Er are the elastic moduli of the composite and its constituents, MPa (lb/in2); and fm and fr are again the volume fractions of the matrix and reinforcing phase. The effect of Equation (9.5) is seen in Figure 9.5(b). Perpendicular to the longitudinal direction, the ﬁbers contribute little to the overall stiffness except for their ﬁlling effect.The composite modulus can be estimated in this direction using the following: Em ErEc# (9.6)fm Er ! fr Em where Ec# elastic modulus perpendicular to the ﬁber direction, MPa (lb/in2). The two equations for Ec demonstrate the signiﬁcant anisotropy of ﬁber-reinforced composites. This directional effect can be seen in Figure 9.6 for a ﬁber-reinforced polymer 250 25 150 35 30 Elastic modulus, lb/in.2 106 Tensile strength, MPa Elastic modulus, GPa 200 Tensile strength, ksi 20 600FIGURE 9.6 Variation in elastic modulus and tensile strength as afunction of direction of 15100 400 10 measurement relative to longitudinal axis ofcarbon ﬁber-reinforced 50 5 200 epoxy composite. 0 30 60 90 0 30 60 90 (Source: [7]). Fiber angle, degrees Fiber angle, degrees composite, in which both elastic modulus and tensile strength are measured relative to ﬁber direction. Fibers illustrate the importance of geometric shape. Most materials have tensile strengths several times greater in a ﬁbrous form than in bulk. However, applications of ﬁbers are limited by surface ﬂaws, buckling when subjected to compression, and the inconvenience of the ﬁlament geometry when a solid component is needed. By imbedding the ﬁbers in a polymer matrix, a composite material is obtained that avoids the problems of ﬁbers but utilizes their strengths. The matrix provides the bulk shape to protect the ﬁber surfaces and resist buckling; and the ﬁbers lend their high strength to the composite. When a load is applied, the low-strength matrix deforms and distributes the stress to the high-strength ﬁbers, which then carry the load. If individual ﬁbers break, the load is redistributed through the matrix to other ﬁbers. 9.1.4 OTHER COMPOSITE STRUCTURES FIGURE 9.7 Laminar composite structures:(a) conventional laminar structure; (b) sandwich structure using a foam core,and (c) honeycombsandwich structure. The model of a composite material described above is one in which a reinforcing phase is imbedded in a matrix phase, the combination having properties that are superior in certain respects to either of the constituents alone. However, composites can take alternative forms that do not ﬁt this model, some of which are of considerable commercial and technological importance. A laminar composite structure consists of two or more layers bonded together to form an integral piece, as in Figure 9.7(a). The layers are usually thick enough that this composite can be readily identiﬁed—not always the case with other composites. The layers are often of different materials, but not necessarily. Plywood is such an example; the layers are of the same wood, but the grains are oriented differently to increase overall strength of the laminated piece. A laminar composite often uses different materials in its layers to gain the advantage of combining the particular properties of each. In some cases, the layers themselves may be composite materials. It was mentioned that wood is a composite material; therefore, plywood is a laminar composite structure in which the layers themselves are composite materials.A list of examples of laminar composites is compiled in Table 9.3. The sandwich structure is sometimes distinguished as a special case of the laminar composite structure. It consists of a relatively thick core of low-density material bonded on both faces to thin sheets of a different material.The low-density core may be a foamed material, as in Figure 9.7(b), or a honeycomb, as in (c). The reason for using a sandwich structure is to obtain a material with high strength-to-weight and stiffness-to-weight ratios. Foam Honey (a) (b) (c) Metal Matrix Composites Metal matrix composites (MMCs) consist of a metal matrix reinforced by a second phase. Common reinforcing phases include (1) particles of ceramic and (2) ﬁbers of various materials, including other metals, ceramics, carbon, and boron. MMCs of the ﬁrst type are commonly called cermets. 9.2.1 CERMETS A cermet1 is a composite material in which a ceramic is contained in a metallic ma-trix.The ceramic often dominates the mixture,sometimes ranging up to 96% by volume. Bonding can be enhanced by slight solubility between phases at the elevated temperatures used in processing these composites. Cermets can be subdivided into (1) cemented carbides and (2) oxide-based cermets. Cemented Carbides Cemented carbides are composed of one or more carbide compounds bonded in a metallic matrix. The term cermet is not used for all of these materials, even though it is technically correct. The common cemented carbides are based on tungsten carbide (WC), titanium carbide (TiC), and chromium carbide (Cr3C2). Tantalum carbide (TaC) and others are also used but less commonly. The principal metallic binders are cobalt and nickel. The carbide ceramics (Section 7.3.2) are the principal ingredient in cemented carbides, typically ranging in content from 80% to 95% of total weight. Cemented carbide parts are produced by particulate processing techniques (Section 16.3). Cobalt is the binder used for WC (see Figure 9.8), and nickel is a common binder for TiC and Cr3C2. Even though the binder constitutes only about 5% to 15%, its effect on mechanical properties is signiﬁcant in the composite 1The word “cermet” was ﬁrst used in the English language around 1948. FIGURE 9.8 Photomicrograph(about 1500X) ofcemented carbide with 85% WC and 15% Co. (Photo courtesy of Kennametal Inc.) material. Using WC–Co as an example, as the percentage of Co is increased, hardness is decreased and transverse rupture strength (TRS) is increased, as shown in Figure 9.9. TRS correlates with toughness of the WC–Co composite. Cutting tools are the most common application of cemented carbides based on tungsten carbide. Other applications of WC–Co cemented carbides include wire drawing dies, rock-drilling bits and other mining tools, dies for powder metallurgy, indenters for hardness testers, and other applications where hardness and wear resistance are critical requirements. Titanium carbide cermets are used principally for high temperature applications. Nickel is the preferred binder; its oxidation resistance at high temperatures is 94 93 2800 Transverse rupture 2450 Hardness, HRA 92 91 90 2100 1750 1400 89 1050FIGURE 9.9 Typical plot of hardness and transverse rupturestrength as a functionof cobalt content. Cobalt content, % superior to that of cobalt.Applications include gas-turbine nozzle vanes,valve seats, thermocouple protection tubes, torch tips, and hot-working spinning tools [11]. TiC–Ni is also used as a cutting tool material in machining operations. Compared with WC–Co cemented carbides, nickel-bonded chromium carbides are more brittle, but have excellent chemical stability and corrosion resistance. This combination, together with good wear resistance, makes it suitable for applications such as gage blocks, valve liners, spray nozzles, and bearing seal rings [11]. Oxide-based Cermets Most of these composites utilize Al2O3 as the particulate phase;MgO is another oxide sometimes used.A common metal matrix is chromium, although other metals can also be used as binders. Relative proportions of the two phases vary signiﬁcantly, with the possibility for the metal binder to be the major ingredient. Applications include cutting tools, mechanical seals, and thermocouple shields. 9.2.2 FIBER-REINFORCED METAL MATRIX COMPOSITES These MMCs are of interest because they combine the high tensile strength and modulus of elasticity of a ﬁber with metals of low density, thus achieving good strength-to-weight and modulus-to-weight ratios in the resulting composite material. Typical metals used as the low-density matrix are aluminum, magnesium, and titanium. Some of the important ﬁber materials used in the composite include Al2O3, boron, carbon, and SiC. Properties of ﬁber-reinforced MMCs are anisotropic, as expected. Maximum tensile strength in the preferred direction is obtained by using continuous ﬁbers bonded strongly to the matrix metal. Elastic modulus and tensile strength of the composite material increase with increasing ﬁber volume. MMCs with ﬁber reinforcement have good high-temperature strength properties; and they are good electrical and thermal conductors. Applications have largely been components in aircraft and turbine machinery, where these properties can be exploited. Ceramic Matrix Composites Ceramics have certain attractive properties: high stiffness, hardness, hot hardness, and compressive strength; and relatively low density. Ceramics also have several faults: low toughness and bulk tensile strength, and susceptibility to thermal cracking. Ceramic matrix composites (CMCs) represent an attempt to retain the desirable properties of ceramics while compensating for their weaknesses. CMCs consist of a ceramic primary phase imbedded with a secondary phase. To date, most development work has focused on the use of ﬁbers as the secondary phase. Success has been elusive. Technical difﬁculties include thermal and chemical compatibility of the constituents in CMCs during processing. Also, as with any ceramic material, limitations on part geometry must be considered. Ceramic materials used as matrices include alumina (Al2O3), boron carbide (B4C), boron nitride (BN), silicon carbide (SiC), silicon nitride (Si3N4), titanium carbide (TiC), and several types of glass [10]. Some of these materials are still in the development stage as CMC matrices. Fiber materials in CMCs include carbon, SiC, and Al2O3. FIGURE 9.10 Highlymagniﬁed electron microscopy photograph (about 3000X) showingfracture surface of SiC whisker reinforced ceramic (Al2O3) used ascutting tool material.(Courtesy of GreenleafCorporation.) The reinforcing phase in current CMC technology consists of either short ﬁbers, such as whiskers, or long ﬁbers. Products with short ﬁbers have been successfully fabricated using particulate processing methods, the ﬁbers being treated as a form of powder in these materials.Although there are performance advantages in using long ﬁbers as reinforcement in ceramic matrix composites, development of economical processing techniques for these materials has been difﬁcult. One promising commercial application of CMCs is in metal-cutting tools as a competitor of cemented carbides, illustrated in Figure 9.10. The composite tool material has whiskers of SiC in a matrix of Al2O3. Other potential applications are in elevated temperatures and environments that are chemically corrosive to other materials. Polymer Matrix Composites A polymer matrix composite (PMC) consists of a polymer primary phase in which a secondary phase is imbedded in the form of ﬁbers, particles, or ﬂakes. Commercially, PMCs are the most important of the three classes of synthetic composites. They include most plastic molding compounds, rubber reinforced with carbon black, and ﬁber-reinforced polymers (FRPs). Of the three, FRPs are most closely identiﬁed with the term composite. If one mentions “composite material” to a design engineer, FRP is usually the composite that comes to mind. 9.4.1 FIBER-REINFORCED POLYMERS A ﬁ ber-reinforced polymer is a composite material consisting of a polymer matrix imbedded with high-strength ﬁbers. The polymer matrix is usually a thermosetting plastic such as unsaturated polyester or epoxy, but thermoplastic polymers, such as nylons (polyamides), polycarbonate, polystyrene, and polyvinylchloride, are also used. In addition, elastomers are also reinforced by ﬁbers for rubber products such as tires and conveyor belts. Fibers in PMCs come in various forms: discontinuous (chopped), continuous, or woven as a fabric. Principal ﬁ ber materials in FRPs are glass, carbon, and Kevlar 49. Less common ﬁbers include boron, SiC, and Al2O3, and steel. Glass (in particular E-glass) is the most common ﬁber material in today’s FRPs; its use to reinforce plastics dates from around 1920. The term advanced composites is sometimes used in connection with FRPs developed since the late 1960s that use boron, carbon, or Kevlar, as the reinforcing ﬁbers [13]. Epoxy is the common matrix polymer. These composites generally have high ﬁber content (% 50% by volume) and possess high strength and modulus of elasticity. When two or more ﬁber materials are combined in the FRP composite, it is called a hybrid composite. Advantages cited for hybrids over conventional or advanced FRPs include balanced strength and stiffness, improved toughness and impact resistance, and reduced weight [11]. Advanced and hybrid composites are used in aerospace applications. The most widely used form of the FRP itself is a laminar structure,made by stacking and bonding thin layers of ﬁber and polymer until the desired thickness is obtained. By varying the ﬁber orientation among the layers, a speciﬁed level of anisotropy in properties can be achieved in the laminate. This method is used to form parts of thin cross section, such as aircraft wing and fuselage sections, automobile and truck body panels, and boat hulls. Properties There are a number of attractive features that distinguish ﬁber-reinforced plastics as engineering materials. Most notable are (1) high strength-to-weight ratio, (2) high modulus-to-weight ratio, and (3) low speciﬁc gravity. A typical FRP weighs only about one ﬁfth as much as steel; yet strength and modulus are comparable in the ﬁber direction. Table 9.4 compares these properties for several FRPs, steels, and an aluminum alloy. Properties listed in Table 9.4 depend on the proportion of ﬁbers in the composite. Both tensile strength and elastic modulus increase as the ﬁber content is increased, by Equation (9.5). Other properties and characteristics of ﬁber-reinforced plastics include (4) good fatigue strength; (5) good corrosion resistance, although polymers are soluble in various chemicals; (6) low thermal expansion for many FRPs, leading to good dimensional stability;and (7) signiﬁcant anisotropy in properties.With regard to this last feature, the mechanical properties of the FRPs given in Table 9.4 are TABLE • 9.4 Comparison of typical properties of ﬁber-reinforced plastics and representative metal alloys. Compiled from [3], [7], and other sources. Properties are measured in the ﬁber direction. aIndices are relative tensile strength-to-weight (TS/SG) and elastic modulus-to-weight (E/SG) ratios compared to low-C steel as the base (index  1.0 for the base). bHigh tensile strength carbon ﬁbers used in FRP. cHigh modulus carbon ﬁbers used in FRP. in the direction of the ﬁber.As previously noted,their values are signiﬁcantly less when measured in a different direction. Applications During the last three decades there has been a steady growth in the application of ﬁber-reinforced polymers in products requiring high strength and low weight, often as substitutions for metals. The aerospace industry is one of the biggest users of advanced composites. Designers are continually striving to reduce aircraft weight to increase fuel efﬁciency and payload capacity. Applications of advanced composites in both military and commercial aircraft have increased steadily. Much of the structural weight of today’s airplanes and helicopters consists of FRPs. The new Boeing 787 Dreamliner features 50% (by weight) composite (carbon ﬁber-reinforced plastic). That’s about 80% of the volume of the aircraft. Composites are used for the fuselage, wings, tail, doors, and interior. By comparison, Boeing’s 777 has only about 12% composites (by weight). The automotive industry is another important user of FRPs. The most obvious applications are FRP body panels for cars and truck cabs. A notable example is the Chevrolet Corvette that has been produced with FRP bodies for decades. Less apparent applications are in certain chassis and engine parts. Automotive applications differ from those in aerospace in two signiﬁcant respects. First, the requirement for high strength-to-weight ratio is less demanding than for aircraft. Car and truck applications can use conventional ﬁberglass reinforced plastics rather than advanced composites. Second, production quantities are much higher in automotive applications, requiring more economical methods of fabrication. Continued use of low-carbon sheet steel in automobiles in the face of FRP’s advantages is evidence of the low cost and processability of steel. FRPs have been widely adopted for sports and recreational equipment. Fiberglass reinforced plastic has been used for boat hulls since the 1940s. Fishing rods were another early application.Today,FRPs are represented in a wide assortment of sports products, including tennis rackets, golf club shafts, football helmets, bows and arrows, skis, and bicycle wheels. 9.4.2 OTHER POLYMER MATRIX COMPOSITES In addition to FRPs, other PMCs contain particles, ﬂakes, and short ﬁbers. Ingredients of the secondary phase are called ﬁ llers when used in polymer molding compounds (Section 8.1.5).Fillers divide into two categories:(1) reinforcements and (2) extenders. Reinforcing ﬁ llers serve to strengthen or otherwise improve mechanical properties of the polymer. Common examples include: wood ﬂour and powdered mica in phenolic and amino resins to increase strength, abrasion resistance, and dimensional stability; and carbon black in rubber to improve strength, wear, and tear resistance. Extenders simply increase the bulk and reduce the cost-per-unit weight of the polymer, but have little or no effect on mechanical properties. Extenders may be formulated to improve molding characteristics of the resin. Foamed polymers (Section 13.11) are a form of composite in which gas bubbles are imbedded in a polymer matrix. Styrofoam and polyurethane foam are the most common examples. The combination of near-zero density of the gas and relatively low density of the matrix makes these materials extremely light weight.The gas mixture also lends very low thermal conductivity for applications in which heat insulation is required. 