MANUFACTURING CAPABILITY
A manufacturing plant consists of a set of processes  and systems  (and people, of 
course) designed to transform a certain limited range of materials  into products of 
increased value. These three building blocks—materials, processes, and systems—
constitute the subject of modern manufacturing. There is a strong interdependence 
among these factors. A company engaged in manufacturing cannot do everything. 
FIGURE 1.3 Relationship 
between product variety and 
production quantity in discrete 
product manufacturing.
C01.indd   7C01.indd   7 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 8 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing
It must do only certain things, and it must do those things well. Manufacturing ca-
pability  refers to the scope of technical and physical capabilities and limitations of 
a manufacturing company and each of its plants. Manufacturing capability has three 
dimensions: (1) technological processing capability, (2) physical size and weight of 
product, and (3) production capacity.
Technological Processing Capability  The technological processing capabil-
ity of a plant (or company) is its available set of manufacturing processes. Certain 
plants perform machining operations, others roll steel billets into sheet stock,  and 
others build automobiles. A machine shop cannot roll steel, and a rolling mill can-
not build cars. The underlying feature that distinguishes these plants is the processes 
they can perform. Technological processing capability is closely related to material 
type. Certain manufacturing processes are suited to certain materials, whereas other 
processes are suited to other materials. By specializing in a certain process or group 
of processes, the plant is simultaneously specializing in certain material types. Tech-
nological processing capability includes not only the physical processes, but also the 
expertise possessed by plant personnel in these processing technologies. Companies 
must concentrate on the design and manufacture of products that are compatible 
with their technological processing capability.
Physical Product Limitations  A second aspect of manufacturing capability is 
imposed by the physical product. A plant with a given set of processes is limited 
in terms of the size and weight of the products that can be accommodated. Large,  
heavy products are difﬁ  cult to move. To move these products about, the plant must 
be equipped with cranes of the required load capacity. Smaller parts and products 
made in large quantities can be moved by conveyor or other means. The limitation 
on product size and weight extends to the physical capacity of the manufacturing 
equipment as well. Production machines come in different sizes. Larger machines 
must be used to process larger parts. The production and material handling equip-
ment must be planned for products that lie within a certain size and weight range.
Production Capacity  A third limitation on a plant’s manufacturing capability 
is the production quantity that can be produced in a given time period (e.g., month 
or year). This quantity limitation is commonly called plant capacity , or production 
capacity , deﬁ  ned as the maximum rate of production that a plant can achieve under 
assumed operating conditions. The operating conditions refer to number of shifts 
per week, hours per shift, direct labor manning levels in the plant, and so on. These 
factors represent inputs to the manufacturing plant. Given these inputs, how much 
output can the factory produce?
Plant capacity is usually measured in terms of output units, such as annual tons of 
steel produced by a steel mill, or number of cars produced by a ﬁ  nal assembly plant. 
In these cases, the outputs are homogeneous. In cases in which the output units are 
not homogeneous, other factors may be more appropriate measures, such as avail-
able labor hours of productive capacity in a machine shop that produces a variety 
of parts.
Materials, processes, and systems are the basic building blocks of manufacturing 
and the three broad subject areas of this book. This introductory chapter provides 
an overview of these three subjects before embarking on a detailed coverage in the 
remaining chapters.
C01.indd   8C01.indd   8 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM Section 1.2/Materials in Manufacturing 9