MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES AND PRODUCTS
Manufacturing is an important commercial activity performed by companies that 
sell products to customers. The type of manufacturing done by a company depends 
on the kinds of products it makes. 
Manufacturing Industries  Industry consists of enterprises and organizations that 
produce or supply goods and services. Industries can be classiﬁ  ed as primary , second-
ary, or tertiary. Primary industries  cultivate and exploit natural resources, such as 
agriculture and mining. Secondary industries  take the outputs of the primary indus-
tries and convert them into consumer and capital goods. Manufacturing is the prin-
cipal activity in this category, but construction and power utilities are also included. 
Tertiary industries  constitute the service sector of the economy. A list of speciﬁ  c 
industries in these categories is presented in Table 1.2.
Primary Secondary Tertiary (service)
Agriculture Aerospace Food processing  Banking Insurance
Forestry Apparel Glass, ceramics Communications Legal
Fishing Automotive Heavy machinery Education Real estate
Livestock Basic metals Paper Entertainment Repair and
Quarries Beverages Petroleum reﬁ  ning Financial services maintenance
Mining Building materials Pharmaceuticals Government Restaurant
Petroleum Chemicals Plastics (shaping) Health and medical Retail trade
 Computers Power utilities Hotel Tourism
 Construction Publishing Information Transportation
 Consumer appliances Textiles  Wholesale trade
 Electronics Tire and rubber 
 Equipment Wood and furniture
 Fabricated metalsTABLE  • 1.2 Speciﬁ  c industries in the primary, secondary, and tertiary categories.
C01.indd   5C01.indd   5 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 6 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing
This book is concerned with the secondary industries in Table 1.2, which include 
the companies engaged in manufacturing. However, the International Standard 
Industrial Classiﬁ  cation (ISIC) used to compile Table 1.2 includes several industries 
whose production technologies are not covered in this text; for example, beverages, 
chemicals, and food processing. In this book, manufacturing means production of 
hardware , which ranges from nuts and bolts to digital computers and military weap-
ons. Plastic and ceramic products are included, but apparel, paper, pharmaceuticals, 
power utilities, publishing, and wood products are excluded. 
Manufactured Products  Final products made by the manufacturing industries 
can be divided into two major classes: consumer goods and capital goods. Consumer 
goods  are products purchased directly by consumers, such as cars, personal comput-
ers, TVs, tires, and tennis rackets. Capital goods  are those purchased by companies 
to produce goods and/or provide services. Examples of capital goods include aircraft, 
computers, communication equipment, medical apparatus, trucks and buses, railroad 
locomotives, machine tools, and construction equipment. Most of these capital goods 
are purchased by the service industries. It was noted in the introduction that manu-
facturing accounts for about 12% of gross domestic product and services about 75% 
of GDP in the United States. Yet the manufactured capital goods purchased by the 
service sector are the enablers of that sector. Without the capital goods, the service 
industries could not function. 
In addition to ﬁ  nal products, other manufactured items include the materials, 
components, tools, and supplies used by the companies that make the ﬁ  nal products. 
Examples of these items include sheet steel, bar stock, metal stampings, machined 
parts, plastic moldings and extrusions, cutting tools, dies, molds, and lubricants. 
Thus, the manufacturing industries consist of a complex infrastructure with vari-
ous categories and layers of intermediate suppliers with whom the ﬁ  nal consumer 
never deals.
This book is generally concerned with discrete items —individual parts and 
assembled products rather than items produced by continuous processes . A metal 
stamping is a discrete item, but the sheet-metal coil from which it is made is continu-
ous (almost). Many discrete parts start out as continuous or semicontinuous prod-
ucts, such as extrusions and electrical wire. Long sections made in almost continuous 
lengths are cut to the desired size. An oil reﬁ  nery is a better example of a continuous 
process.
Production Quantity and Product Variety  The quantity of products made by a 
factory has an important inﬂ  uence on the way its people, facilities,  and procedures 
are organized. Annual production quantities can be classiﬁ  ed into three ranges: (1) 
low production, quantities in the range 1 to 100 units per year; (2) medium  produc-
tion, from 100 to 10,000 units annually; and (3) high production, 10,000 to millions 
of units. The boundaries between the three ranges are somewhat arbitrary (author’s 
judgment). Depending on the kinds of products, these boundaries may shift by an 
order of magnitude or so.
Production quantity refers to the number of units produced annually of a particu-
lar product type. Some plants produce a variety of different product types, each type 
being made in low or medium quantities. Other plants specialize in high production 
of only one product type. It is instructive to identify product variety as a parameter 
distinct from production quantity. Product variety refers to different product designs 
or types that are produced in the plant. Different products have different shapes and 
C01.indd   6C01.indd   6 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 7
sizes; they perform different functions; they are intended for different markets; some 
have more components than others; and so forth. The number of different product 
types made each year can be counted. When the number of product types made in 
the factory is high, this indicates high product variety.
There is an inverse correlation between product variety and production quantity 
in terms of factory operations. If a factory’s product variety is high, then its produc-
tion quantity is likely to be low; but if production quantity is high, then product vari-
ety will be low, as depicted in Figure 1.3. Manufacturing plants tend to specialize in a 
combination of production quantity and product variety that lies somewhere inside 
the diagonal band in Figure 1.3.
Although product variety has been identiﬁ  ed as a quantitative parameter (the 
number of different product types made by the plant or company), this parameter is 
much less exact than production quantity because details on how much the designs 
differ are not captured simply by the number of different designs. Differences 
between an automobile and an air conditioner are far greater than between an air 
conditioner and a heat pump. Within each product type, there are differences among 
speciﬁ  c models.
The extent of the product differences may be small or great, as illustrated in the 
automotive industry. Each of the U.S. automotive companies produces cars with two 
or three different nameplates in the same assembly plant, although the body styles 
and other design features are virtually the same. In different plants, the company 
builds heavy trucks. The terms “soft” and “hard” might be used to describe these 
differences in product variety. Soft product variety  occurs when there are only small 
differences among products, such as the differences among car models made on the 
same production line. In an assembled product, soft variety is characterized by a 
high proportion of common parts among the models. Hard product variety  occurs 
when the products differ substantially, and there are few common parts, if any. The 
difference between a car and a truck exempliﬁ  es hard variety.