METALS
Metals used in manufacturing are usually alloys , which are composed of two or 
more elements, with at least one being a metallic element. Metals and alloys can be 
divided into two basic groups: (1) ferrous, and (2) nonferrous.1.2
Ferrous Metals 
Metals
Nonferrous
Metals
Crystalline
Ceramics 
Ceramics
Glasses 
Engineering
Materials
Thermoplastics
Polymers Thermosets
Elastomers
Metal Matrix
Composites 
CompositesCeramic Matrix
Composites
Polymer Matrix
CompositesFIGURE 1.4 
Classiﬁ  cation of the 
four engineering 
materials.
C01.indd   9C01.indd   9 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 10 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing
Ferrous Metals  Ferrous metals are based on iron; the group includes steel and cast 
iron. These metals constitute the most important group commercially,  more than 
three-fourths of the metal tonnage throughout the world. Pure iron has limited com-
mercial use, but when alloyed with carbon, iron has more uses and greater commer-
cial value than any other metal. Alloys of iron and carbon form steel and cast iron.
Steel  can be deﬁ  ned as an iron–carbon alloy containing 0.02% to 2.11% carbon. It 
is the most important category within the ferrous metal group. Its composition often 
includes other alloying elements as well, such as manganese, chromium, nickel, and 
molybdenum, to enhance the properties of the metal. Applications of steel include 
construction (bridges, I-beams, and nails), transportation (trucks, rails, and rolling 
stock for railroads), and consumer products (automobiles and appliances).
Cast iron  is an alloy of iron and carbon (2% to 4%) used in casting (primarily 
sand casting). Silicon is also present in the alloy (in amounts from 0.5% to 3%), and 
other elements are often added also, to obtain desirable properties in the cast part. 
Cast iron is available in several different forms, of which gray cast iron is the most 
common; its applications include blocks and heads for internal combustion engines.
Nonferrous Metals  Nonferrous metals include the other metallic elements and 
their alloys. In almost all cases, the alloys are more important commercially than the 
pure metals . The nonferrous metals include the pure metals and alloys of aluminum, 
copper, gold, magnesium, nickel, silver, tin, titanium, zinc, and other metals.