Ibid, p. 541.
C01.indd   29C01.indd   29 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 30 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing
accomplished in-house. Outsourcing can be done in several ways, including the use 
of local suppliers. In this case the jobs remain in the United States. Alternatively, 
U.S. companies can outsource to foreign countries, so that parts and products once 
made in the United States are now made outside the country. In this case U.S. jobs 
are displaced. Two possibilities can be distinguished: (1) offshore outsourcing , which 
refers to production in China or other overseas locations and transporting the items 
by cargo ship to the United States, and (2) near-shore outsourcing , which means the 
items are made in Canada, Mexico, or Central America and shipped by rail or truck 
into the United States. 
Outsourcing has resulted in the growth of contract manufacturers , companies 
that specialize in producing parts, subassemblies, and/or products for other com-
panies. Contract manufacturers have developed expertise and efﬁ  ciencies in cer-
tain manufacturing operations, which means they can likely produce the contracted 
items at prices that are lower than the production costs of the customer company 
if it were the producer. Contract manufacturers include both domestic (U.S.) and 
foreign companies.6 Reasons why a company might prefer to use the services of a 
contract manufacturer include: (1) the company beneﬁ  ts from cost savings because 
it does not have to pay the factory expenses associated with production, (2) the 
company can focus its resources on design and marketing of products rather than 
manufacturing, and (3) the company may beneﬁ  t from skills possessed by the con-
tract manufacturer but not by itself. On the other hand, there are risks associated 
with contract manufacturing by the customer company. In turning over its prod-
uct designs it loses control over its intellectual property, which might result in the 
contract manufacturer becoming a competitor. The distinction between a contract 
manufacturer and a supplier is perhaps subtle. A supplier  is usually thought of as a 
company that provides materials and components for a customer who is engaged in 
production of a product, whereas a contract manufacturer accomplishes the whole 
production of the product. It may use suppliers itself.
China is of particular interest in this discussion of globalization and outsourcing 
because of (1) its fast-growing economy (it now boasts the second largest gross domes-
tic product in the world), (2) the importance of manufacturing in that economy, and 
(3) the extent to which U.S. companies have outsourced work to China. To take advan-
tage of the low labor rates, many U.S. companies have moved much of their production 
to China (and other east Asian countries). Despite the logistics problems and costs 
of shipping the goods back into the United States, the result has been lower costs 
and higher proﬁ  ts for the outsourcing companies, as well as lower prices and a wider 
variety of available products for American consumers. The downside has been the loss 
of well-paying manufacturing jobs in the United States. Another consequence of U.S. 
outsourcing to China has been a reduction in the relative contribution of the manufac-
turing sector to GDP . In the 1990s, the manufacturing industries accounted for about 
20% of GDP in the United States. Today, that contribution is only about 12%. At the 
same time, the manufacturing sector in China has grown (along with the rest of its 
economy), now accounting for about 35% of Chinese GDP . 
Recently, there have been signs that outsourcing of production to China by 
American companies may be declining, and that manufacturing jobs are being 
brought back to the U.S. There are several reasons for this trend, which is called