The largest contract manufacturer at the time of this writing is Hon Hai Precision Industries (a.k.a. 
Foxconn, headquartered in Taiwan, but many of its factories are located in China). It ranked 60th in the 
Fortune Global 500 with sales of $95 billion in 2010 ( Fortune , July 25, 2011).
C01.indd   30C01.indd   30 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM Section 1.6/Recent Developments in Manufacturing 31
reshoring . First, wage rates in China are increasing as the government attempts to 
evolve from an export-driven economy to a consumer-oriented economy, similar to 
the United States . Higher Chinese wage rates mean less advantage for U.S. compa-
nies to offshore jobs to China. Second, logistics costs and delays involved in trans-
porting products from China to North America are signiﬁ  cant, especially as oil prices 
increase. Accordingly, some companies, in their analyses of costs and beneﬁ  ts, have 
decided to produce in the United States, re-opening old factories or building new 
ones. On the other hand, U.S. companies producing goods for the Chinese market still 
have good reasons to keep their operations going in that country, just as Japanese and 
German automobile makers have established plants in the United States.
Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing  An inherent feature of virtually all 
manufacturing processes is waste (Section 1.3.1). The most obvious examples are 
material removal processes,  in which chips are removed from a starting workpiece 
to create the desired part geometry. Waste in one form or another is a by-product 
of nearly all production operations. Another unavoidable aspect of manufacturing 
is that power is required to accomplish any given process. Generating that power 
requires fossil fuels (at least in the United States and China), the burning of which 
results in pollution of the environment. At the end of the manufacturing sequence, a 
product is created that is sold to a customer. Ultimately, the product wears out and 
is disposed of, perhaps in some landﬁ  ll, with the associated environmental degrada-
tion. More and more attention is being paid by society to the environmental impact 
of human activities throughout the world and how modern civilization is using our 
natural resources at an unsustainable rate. Global warming is presently a major con-
cern. The manufacturing industries contribute to these problems. 
Environmentally conscious manufacturing  refers to programs that seek to deter-
mine the most efﬁ  cient use of materials and natural resources in production and 
minimize the negative consequences on the environment. Other terms for these pro-
grams include green manufacturing  and sustainable manufacturing . They all boil 
down to two basic approaches: (1) design products that minimize their environmen-
tal impact and (2) design processes that are environmentally friendly. 
Product design is the logical starting point in environmentally conscious manu-
facturing. The term design for environment  (DFE) is used for the techniques that 
attempt to consider environmental impact during product design prior to produc-
tion. Considerations in DFE include (1) selecting materials that require minimum 
energy to produce, (2) selecting processes that minimize waste of materials and 
energy, (3) designing parts that can be recycled or reused, (4) designing products 
that can be readily disassembled to recover the parts, (5) designing products that 
minimize the use of hazardous and toxic materials, and (6) giving attention to how 
the product will be disposed of at the end of its useful life. 
To a great degree, decisions made during design dictate the materials and processes 
that are used to make the product. These decisions limit the options available to the 
manufacturing departments to achieve sustainability. However, various approaches 
can be applied to make plant operations more environmentally friendly. They include 
(1) adopting good housekeeping practices—keeping the factory clean, (2) preventing 
pollutants from escaping into the environment (rivers and atmosphere), (3) minimiz-
ing waste of materials in unit operations, (4) recycling rather than discarding waste 
materials, (5) using net shape processes, (6) using renewable energy sources when 
feasible, (7) maintaining production equipment so that it operates at maximum efﬁ  -
ciency, and (8) investing in equipment that minimizes power requirements.
C01.indd   31C01.indd   31 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM