MANUFACTURING DEFINED
As a ﬁ  eld of study in the modern context, manufacturing can be deﬁ  ned two ways, 
one technologic, and the other economic. Technologically, manufacturing  is the ap-
plication of physical and chemical processes to alter the geometry, properties, and/
or appearance of a given starting material to make parts or products; manufacturing 
also includes assembly of multiple parts to make products. The processes to accom-
plish manufacturing involve a combination of machinery, tools, power, and labor, as 
depicted in Figure 1.1(a). Manufacturing is almost always carried out as a sequence 
of operations. Each operation brings the material closer to the desired ﬁ  nal state.
Economically, manufacturing  is the transformation of materials into items of 
greater value by means of one or more processing and/or assembly operations, as 
depicted in Figure 1.1(b). The key point is that manufacturing adds value  to the 
material by changing its shape or properties, or by combining it with other materials 
that have been similarly altered. The material has been made more valuable through 
the manufacturing operations performed on it. When iron ore is converted into steel, 
value is added. When sand is transformed into glass, value is added. When petroleum 
is reﬁ  ned into plastic, value is added. And when plastic is molded into the complex 
geometry of a patio chair, it is made even more valuable.
Figure 1.2 shows a product on the left and the starting workpiece from which the 
circular frame of the product was produced on the right. The starting workpiece is 
FIGURE 1.2 A mechanical 
heart value on the left and the 
titanium workpiece from which 
the frame is machined on the 
right.  (Courtesy of George E. 
Kane Manufacturing Technology 
Laboratory, Lehigh University.)(a) (b)Starting
material
Starting
materialProcessed
part
Processed
partMaterial in
processingValue
added $$
Manufacturing
processManufacturing
process
Scrap and
wasteLaborPowerToolingMachinery
$$$ $
FIGURE 1.1 Two ways to deﬁ  ne manufacturing: (a) as a technical process, and (b) as an economic process.
C01.indd   4C01.indd   4 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 5
a titanium billet, and the product consists of a carbon wafer assembled to the hook 
that protrudes from the right of the frame. The product is an artiﬁ  cial heart valve 
costing thousands of dollars, well worth it for patients who need one. (By the way, 
the surgeon who installs it charges several more thousand dollars.) The titanium 
billet costs a small fraction of the selling price. It measures about 25 mm (1 in) 
in diameter. The frame was machined (a material removal process, Section 1.3.1) 
from the starting billet. Machining time was about one hour. Note the added value 
provided by this operation. Note also the waste in the unit operation, as depicted 
in Figure 1.1(a); the ﬁ  nished frame has only about 5% of the mass of the starting 
workpiece (although the titanium swarf can be recycled).
The words manufacturing and production are often used interchangeably. The 
author’s view is that production has a broader meaning than manufacturing. To illus-
trate, one might speak of “crude oil production,” but the phrase “crude oil manufac-
turing” seems out of place. Yet when used in the context of products such as metal 
parts or automobiles, either word seems okay.