What Is Manufacturing?
The word manufacture  is derived from two Latin words, manus  (hand) and factus
(make); the combination means made by hand. The English word manufacture is 
several centuries old, and “made by hand” accurately described the manual methods 
used when the word was ﬁ  rst coined.1 Most modern manufacturing is accomplished 
by automated and computer-controlled machinery (Historical Note 1.1).1.1
Athletic shoes
Automatic teller machine
Automatic dishwasher
Ballpoint pen
Camcorder
Cell phone
Compact disc (CD)
Compact disc player
Compact ﬂ  uorescent light bulb
Contact lenses
Digital camera
Digital video disc (DVD)
Digital video disc playerE-book reader
Fax machine
Hand-held electronic calculator
High density PC diskette
Home security system
Hybrid gas-electric automobile
Industrial robot
Ink-jet color printer
LCD and Plasma TVs
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
machine for medical diagnosis
Medicines
Microwave ovenOne-piece molded plastic patio chair
Optical scanner
Personal computer (PC)
Photocopying machine
Pull-tab beverage cans
Quartz crystal wrist watch
Self-propelled mulching lawnmower
Smart phone
Supersonic aircraft
Tablet computer
Tennis racket of composite materials
Video games
Washing machine and dryerTABLE  • 1.1 Products representing various technologies, most of which affect nearly all of us.
Historical Note 1.1 History of manufacturing
The history of manufacturing can be separated into 
two subjects: (1) the discovery and invention of mate-
rials and processes to make things, and (2) the devel-
opment of the systems of production. The materials 
and processes to make things predate the systems 
by several millennia. Some of the processes—casting, 
hammering (forging), and grinding—date back 6000 
years or more. The early fabrication of implements and 
weapons was accomplished more as crafts and trades 
than manufacturing as it is known today. The ancient 
Romans had what might be called factories to produce weapons, scrolls, pottery and glassware, and other 
products of the time, but the procedures were largely 
based on handicraft.
The systems aspects of manufacturing are examined 
here, and the materials and processes are discussed in 
Historical Note 1 .2. Systems of manufacturing  refer 
to the ways of organizing people and equipment so 
that production can be performed more efﬁ  ciently. 
Several historical events and discoveries stand out 
as having had a major impact on the development of 
modern manufacturing systems.
1As a noun, the word manufacture  ﬁ rst appeared in English around 1567 A.D. As a verb, it ﬁ  rst appeared 
around 1683 A.D.
C01.indd   2C01.indd   2 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 3
Certainly one signiﬁ  cant discovery was the principle 
of division of labor —dividing the total work into tasks 
and having individual workers each become a special-
ist at performing only one task. This principle had been 
practiced for centuries, but the economist Adam Smith 
(1723–1790) is credited with ﬁ  rst explaining its eco-
nomic signiﬁ  cance in The Wealth of Nations .
The Industrial Revolution  (circa 1760–1830) had 
a major impact on production in several ways. It 
marked the change from an economy based on agri-
culture and handicraft to one based on industry and 
manufacturing. The change began in England, where 
a series of machines were invented and steam power 
replaced water, wind, and animal power. These ad-
vances gave British industry signiﬁ  cant advantages 
over other nations, and England attempted to restrict 
export of the new technologies. H owever, the revo-
lution eventually spread to other European countries 
and the United States. Several inventions of the Indus-
trial Revolution greatly contributed to the development 
of manufacturing: (1) Watt’s steam engine —a new 
power-generating technology for industry; (2) machine 
tools , starting with John Wilkinson’s boring machine 
around 1775 (Historical Note 21 .1); (3) the spinning 
jenny,  power loom , and other machinery for the tex-
tile industry that permitted signiﬁ  cant increases in 
productivity; and (4) the factory system —a new way 
of organizing large numbers of production workers 
based on division of labor.
While England was leading the industrial revolu-
tion, an important concept was being introduced in the 
United States: interchangeable parts  manufacture. 
Much credit for this concept is given to Eli Whitney 
(1765–1825), although its importance had been rec-
ognized by others [10]. In 1797 , Whitney negotiated 
a contract to produce 10,000 muskets for the U.S. 
government. The traditional way of making guns at 
the time was to custom-fabricate each part for a par-
ticular gun and then hand-ﬁ  t the parts together by ﬁ  l-
ing. Each musket was unique, and the time to make 
it was considerable. Whitney believed that the com-
ponents could be made accurately enough to permit 
parts assembly without ﬁ  tting. After several years of 
development in his Connecticut factory, he traveled to 
Washington in 1801 to demonstrate the principle. 
He laid out components for 10 muskets before gov-
ernment ofﬁ  cials, including Thomas Jefferson, and 
proceeded to select parts randomly to assemble 
the guns. No special ﬁ  ling or ﬁ  tting was required, 
and all of the guns worked perfectly. The secret be-
hind his achievement was the collection of special 
machines, ﬁ  xtures, and gages that he had developed 
in his factory. Interchangeable parts manufacture required many years of development before becom-
ing a practical reality, but it revolutionized methods of 
manufacturing. It is a prerequisite for mass produc-
tion. Because its origins were in the United States, 
interchangeable parts production came to be known 
as the American System  of manufacture.
The mid- and late 1800s witnessed the expan-
sion of railroads, steam-powered ships, and other 
machines that created a growing need for iron and 
steel. New steel production methods were devel-
oped to meet this demand (Historical Note 6.1). Also 
during this period, several consumer products were 
developed, including the sewing machine, bicycle, 
and automobile. To meet the mass demand for these 
products, more efﬁ  cient production methods were 
required. Some historians identify developments dur-
ing this period as the Second Industrial Revolution , 
characterized in terms of its effects on manufacturing 
systems by (1) mass production, (2) scientiﬁ  c manage-
ment movement, (3) assembly lines, and (4) electriﬁ  -
cation of factories.
In the late 1800s, the scientiﬁ  c management  
movement was developing in the United States in 
response to the need to plan and control the activi-
ties of growing numbers of production workers. The 
movement’s leaders included Frederick W. Taylor 
(1856–1915), Frank Gilbreth (1868–1924), and his wife 
Lillian (1878–1972). Scientiﬁ  c management included 
several features [3]: (1) motion study , aimed at ﬁ  nd-
ing the best method to perform a given task; (2) time 
study , to establish work standards for a job; (3) exten-
sive use of standards  in industry; (4) the piece rate 
system  and similar labor incentive plans; and (5) use 
of data collection, record keeping, and cost account-
ing in factory operations.
Henry Ford (1863–1947) introduced the assembly 
line in 1913 at his Highland Park, Michigan plant. The 
assembly line made possible the mass production of 
complex consumer products. Use of assembly line 
methods permitted Ford to sell a Model T automobile 
for as little as $500, thus making ownership of cars 
feasible for a large segment of the U.S. population.
In 1881, the ﬁ  rst electric power generating station 
had been built in Ne w York City , and soon electric mo-
tors were being used as a power source to operate fac-
tory machinery. This was a far more convenient power 
delivery system than steam engines, which required 
overhead belts to distribute power to the machines. By 
1920, electricity had overtaken steam as the principal 
power source in U.S. factories. The twentieth century 
was a time of more technological advances than in all 
other centuries combined. Many of these develop-
ments resulted in the automation  of manufacturing.
C01.indd   3C01.indd   3 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 4 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing