Manufacturing Processes
A manufacturing process  is a designed procedure that results in physical and/or 
chemical changes to a starting work material with the intention of increasing the 
value of that material. A manufacturing process is usually carried out as a unit oper-
ation , which means that it is a single step in the sequence of steps required to trans-
form the starting material into a ﬁ  nal product. Manufacturing operations can be 
divided into two basic types: (1) processing operations and (2) assembly operations. 
A processing operation  transforms a work material from one state of completion 
to a more advanced state that is closer to the ﬁ  nal desired product. It adds value by 
changing the geometry, properties, or appearance of the starting material. In general, 
processing operations are performed on discrete work parts, but certain processing 
operations are also applicable to assembled items (e.g., painting a spot-welded car 
body). An assembly operation  joins two or more components to create a new entity, 
called an assembly, subassembly, or some other term that refers to the joining proc-
ess (e.g., a welded assembly is called a weldment ). A classiﬁ  cation of manufacturing 
processes is presented in Figure 1.5. Some of the basic processes used in modern 
manufacturing date from antiquity (Historical Note 1.2).1.3
C01.indd   11C01.indd   11 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 12 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing
Permanent
fastening methodsThreaded
fastenersBrazing and
solderingCoating and
deposition processesCleaning and
surface treatmentsHeat
treatmentMaterial
removalDeformation
processesShaping
processes
Property
enhancing processesProcessing
operations
Assembly
operationsManufacturing
processesSurface processing
operations
Permanent
joining processes
Mechanical
fasteningParticulate
processingSolidification
processes
Welding
Adhesive
bonding
FIGURE 1.5 
Classiﬁ  cation of 
manufacturing 
processes.
Historical Note 1.2 Manufacturing materials and processes
Although most of the historical developments that form 
the modern practice of manufacturing have occurred 
only during the last few centuries (Historical Note 1 .1), 
several of the basic fabrication processes date as far 
back as the Neolithic period (circa 8000–3000 B.C.E.). It 
was during this period that processes such as the fol-
lowing were developed: carving and other woodwork-
ing, hand forming and ﬁ ring  of clay pottery, grinding  
and polishing  of stone, spinning  and weaving  of tex-
tiles, and dyeing  of cloth.
Metallurgy and metalworking also began during 
the Neolithic period, in Mesopotamia and other areas 
around the Mediterranean. It either spread to, or de-
veloped independently in, regions of Europe and Asia. Gold was found by early humans in relatively pure form 
in nature; it could be hammered  into shape. Copper 
was probably the ﬁ  rst metal to be extracted from ores, 
thus requiring smelting  as a processing technique. 
Copper could not be hammered readily because it 
strain hardened; instead, it was shaped by casting  
(Historical Note 10.1). Other metals used during this 
period were silver and tin. It was discovered that cop-
per alloyed with tin produced a more workable metal 
than copper alone (casting and hammering could both 
be used). This heralded the important period known as 
the Bronze Age  (circa 3500–1500 B.C.).
Iron was also ﬁ  rst smelted during the Bronze Age. 
Meteorites may have been one source of the metal, 
C01.indd   12C01.indd   12 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 13