PROCESSING OPERATIONS
A processing operation uses energy to alter a work part’s shape, physical properties, 
or appearance to add value to the material. The forms of energy include mechani-
cal, thermal, electrical, and chemical. The energy is applied in a controlled way by 
means of machinery and tooling. Human energy may also be required, but the hu-
man workers are generally employed to control the machines, oversee the opera-
tions, and load and unload parts before and after each cycle of operation. A general 
model of a processing operation is illustrated in Figure 1.1(a). Material is fed into the 
process, energy is applied by the machinery and tooling to transform the material, 
and the completed work part exits the process. Most production operations produce 
waste or scrap, either as a natural aspect of the process (e.g., removing material as in 
machining) or in the form of occasional defective pieces. It is an important objective 
in manufacturing to reduce waste in either of these forms.
More than one processing operation is usually required to transform the starting 
material into ﬁ  nal form. The operations are performed in the particular sequence 
required to achieve the geometry and condition deﬁ  ned by the design speciﬁ  cation.but iron ore was also mined. Temperatures required to 
reduce iron ore to metal are signiﬁ  cantly higher than for 
copper, which made furnace operations more difﬁ  cult. 
Other processing methods were also more difﬁ  cult for 
the same reason. Early blacksmiths learned that when 
certain irons (those containing small amounts of car-
bon) were sufﬁ  ciently heated  and then quenched , 
they became very hard. This permitted grinding a very 
sharp cutting edge on knives and weapons, but it also 
made the metal brittle. Toughness could be increased 
by reheating at a lower temperature, a process known 
as tempering . What we have described is, of course, 
the heat treatment  of steel. The superior properties 
of steel caused it to succeed bronze in many applica-
tions (weaponry, agriculture, and mechanical devices). 
The period of its use has subsequently been named 
the Iron Age  (starting around 1000 B.C.). It was not un-
til much later, well into the nineteenth century, that the 
demand for steel grew signiﬁ  cantly and more modern 
steelmaking techniques were developed (Historical 
Note 6.1).
The beginnings of machine tool technology oc-
curred during the Industrial Revolution. During the peri-
od 1770–1850, machine tools were developed for most 
of the conventional material removal processes , 
such as boring , turning , drilling , milling , shaping , 
and planing  (Historical Note 21 .1). Many of the individ-
ual processes predate the machine tools by centuries; 
for example, drilling and sawing (of wood) date from 
ancient times, and turning (of wood) from around the 
time of Christ.
Assembly methods were used in ancient cultures 
to make ships, weapons, tools, farm implements,  machinery, chariots and carts, furniture, and garments. 
The earliest processes included binding  with twine 
and rope, riveting  and nailing , and soldering . Around