PRODUCTION MACHINES AND TOOLING
Manufacturing operations are accomplished using machinery and tooling (and peo-
ple). The extensive use of machinery in manufacturing began with the Industrial 
Revolution. It was at that time that metal cutting machines started to be developed 
and widely used. These were called machine tools —power-driven machines used 
to operate cutting tools previously operated by hand. Modern machine tools are 
described by the same basic deﬁ  nition, except that the power is electrical rather than 
water or steam, and the level of precision and automation is much greater today. 
Machine tools are among the most versatile of all production machines. They are 
used to make not only parts for consumer products, but also components for other 
production machines. Both in a historic and a reproductive sense, the machine tool 
is the mother of all machinery.
Other production machines include presses  for stamping operations, forge ham-
mers for forging, rolling mills  for rolling sheet metal, welding machines  for weld-
ing, and insertion machines  for inserting electronic components into printed circuit 
boards. The name of the equipment usually follows from the name of the process.
Production equipment can be general purpose or special purpose. General purpose 
equipment  is more ﬂ  exible and adaptable to a variety of jobs. It is commercially availa-
ble for any manufacturing company to invest in. Special purpose equipment  is usually 
designed to produce a speciﬁ  c part or product in very large quantities. The economics 
C01.indd   17C01.indd   17 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 18 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing
of mass production justify large investments in special purpose machinery to achieve 
high efﬁ  ciencies and short cycle times. This is not the only reason for special purpose 
equipment, but it is the dominant one. Another reason may be because the process 
is unique and commercial equipment is not available. Some companies with unique 
processing requirements develop their own special purpose equipment.
Production machinery usually requires tooling  that customizes the equipment for 
the particular part or product. In many cases, the tooling must be designed speciﬁ  cally 
for the part or product conﬁ  guration. When used with general purpose equipment, it 
is designed to be exchanged. For each work part type, the tooling is fastened to the 
machine and the production run is made. When the run is completed, the tooling is 
changed for the next work part type. When used with special purpose machines, the 
tooling is often designed as an integral part of the machine. Because the special purpose 
machine is likely being used for mass production, the tooling may never need changing 
except for replacement of worn components or for repair of worn surfaces.
The type of tooling depends on the type of manufacturing process. In Table 1.3, 
we list examples of special tooling used in various operations. Details are provided 
in the chapters that discuss these processes.