PRODUCTION FACILITIES
Production facilities consist of the factory and the production, material handling, 
and other equipment in the factory. The equipment comes in direct physical contact 
with the parts and/or assemblies as they are being made. The facilities “touch” the 
product. Facilities also include the way the equipment is arranged in the factory—
the plant layout . The equipment is usually organized into logical groupings. In this 
book they are called manufacturing systems , such as an automated production line, 
or a machine cell consisting of an industrial robot and two machine tools.
A manufacturing company attempts to design its manufacturing systems and 
organize its factories to serve the particular mission of each plant in the most efﬁ  -
cient way. Over the years, certain types of production facilities have come to be 
recognized as the most appropriate way to organize for a given combination of prod-
uct variety and production quantity, as discussed in Section 1.1.2. Different types of 
facilities are required for each of the three ranges of annual production quantities.
Low-Quantity Production  In the low-quantity range (1–100 units/year), the term 
job shop  is often used to describe the type of production facility. A job shop makes 
low quantities of specialized and customized products.  The products are typically 
complex, such as space capsules, prototype aircraft, and special machinery. The 
equipment in a job shop is general purpose, and the labor force is highly skilled.
A job shop must be designed for maximum ﬂ  exibility to deal with the wide prod-
uct variations encountered (hard product variety). If the product is large and heavy, 
and therefore difﬁ  cult to move, it typically remains in a single location during its fab-
rication or assembly. Workers and processing equipment are brought to the product, 
rather than moving the product to the equipment. This type of layout is referred to 
as a ﬁ  xed-position layout , shown in Figure 1.11(a). In a pure situation, the product Manufacturing processes and assembly operationsFacilitiesManufacturing
support
Quality control
systems
Manufacturing
systemsManufacturing
support systemsProduction system
Finished
productsEngineering
materialsFIGURE 1.10 Model of 
the production system 
and overview of major 
topics in the book.
C01.indd   19C01.indd   19 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 20 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing
remains in a single location during its entire production. Examples of such products 
include ships, aircraft, locomotives, and heavy machinery. In actual practice, these 
items are usually built in large modules at single locations, and then the completed 
modules are brought together for ﬁ  nal assembly using large-capacity cranes.
The individual components of these large products are often made in factories in 
which the equipment is arranged according to function or type. This arrangement 
is called a process layout . The lathes are in one department, the milling machines 
are in another department, and so on, as in Figure 1.11(b). Different parts, each 
requiring a different operation sequence, are routed through the departments in the 
particular order needed for their processing, usually in batches. The process layout 
is noted for its ﬂ  exibility; it can accommodate a great variety of operation sequences 
for different part conﬁ  gurations. Its disadvantage is that the machinery and methods 
to produce a part are not designed for high efﬁ  ciency.
Medium Quantity Production  In the medium-quantity range (100–10,000 units 
annually), two different types of facility are distinguished, depending on product 
variety. When product variety is hard, the usual approach is batch production , in 
which a batch of one product is made, after which the manufacturing equipment 
is changed over to produce a batch of the next product, and so on. The production 
rate of the equipment is greater than the demand rate for any single product type, 
and so the same equipment can be shared among multiple products. The changeover 
between production runs takes time—time to change tooling and set up the machin-
ery. This setup time is lost production time, and this is a disadvantage of batch manu-
facturing. Batch production is commonly used for make-to-stock situations, in which Departments
Product
Equipment
(mobile)Work unitProduction
machines
(a)
(c)(b)
(d)Workers
Worker
Cell CellWorkstation Equipment Conveyor
Workersv
FIGURE 1.11 Various types of plant layout: (a) ﬁ  xed-position layout, (b) process layout, (c) cellular layout, and 
(d) product layout.
C01.indd   20C01.indd   20 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM Section 1.4/Production Systems 21
items are manufactured to replenish inventory that has been gradually depleted by 
demand. The equipment is usually arranged in a process layout, as in Figure 1.11(b).
An alternative approach to medium-range production is possible if product vari-
ety is soft. In this case, extensive changeovers between one product style and the 
next may not be necessary. It is often possible to conﬁ  gure the manufacturing sys-
tem so that groups of similar products can be made on the same equipment without 
signiﬁ  cant lost time because of setup. The processing or assembly of different parts 
or products is accomplished in cells consisting of several workstations or machines. 
The term cellular manufacturing  is often associated with this type of production. 
Each cell is designed to produce a limited variety of part conﬁ  gurations; that is, the 
cell specializes in the production of a given set of similar parts, according to the 
principles of group technology  (Section 39.5). The layout is called a cellular layout , 
depicted in Figure 1.11(c).
High Production  T h e  h i g h - q u a n t i t y  r a n g e  ( 1 0 , 0 0 0  t o  m i l l i o n s  o f  u n i t s  p e r  y e a r )  i s  
referred to as mass production . The situation is characterized by a high demand rate 
for the product, and the manufacturing system is dedicated to the production of that 
single item.  Two categories of mass production can be distinguished: quantity produc-
tion and ﬂ  ow line production. Quantity production  involves the mass production of 
single parts on single pieces of equipment. It typically involves standard machines 
(e.g., stamping presses) equipped with special tooling (e.g., dies and material handling 
devices), in effect dedicating the equipment to the production of one part type. Typi-
cal layouts used in quantity production are the process layout and cellular layout.
Flow line production  involves multiple pieces of equipment or workstations 
arranged in sequence, and the work units are physically moved through the sequence 
to complete the product. The workstations and equipment are designed speciﬁ  cally 
for the product to maximize efﬁ  ciency. The layout is called a product layout , and the 
workstations are arranged into one long line, as in Figure 1.11(d), or into a series of 
connected line segments. The work is usually moved between stations by mecha-
nized conveyor. At each station, a small amount of the total work is completed on 
each unit of product.
The most familiar example of ﬂ  ow line production is the assembly line, associ-
ated with products such as cars and household appliances. The pure case of ﬂ  ow line 
production occurs when there is no variation in the products made on the line. Every 
product is identical, and the line is referred to as a single model production line . To 
successfully market a given product, it is often beneﬁ  cial to introduce feature and 
model variations so that individual customers can choose the exact merchandise that 
appeals to them. From a production viewpoint, the feature differences represent a 
case of soft product variety. The term mixed-model production line  applies to these 
situations in which there is soft variety in the products made on the line. Modern 
automobile assembly is an example. Cars coming off the assembly line have varia-
tions in options and trim representing different models and in many cases different 
nameplates of the same basic car design.