years ago, forge welding  and adhesive bond-
ing had been developed. Widespread use of screws, 
bolts, and nuts as fasteners—so common in today’s 
assembly—required the development of machine 
tools that could accurately cut the required helical 
shapes (e.g., Maudsley’s screw cutting lathe, 1800). It 
was not until around 1900 that fusion  welding  proc-
esses started to be developed as assembly techniques 
(Historical Note 28.1).
Natural rubber was the ﬁ  rst polymer to be used in 
manufacturing (if we exclude wood, which is a polymer 
composite). The vulcanization  process, discovered by 
Charles Goodyear in 1839, made rubber a useful engi-
neering material (Historical Note 8.2). Subsequent de-
velopments included plastics such as cellulose nitrate 
in 1870, Bakelite in 1900, polyvinylchloride in 1927 , pol-
yethylene in 1932, and nylon in the late 1930s (Histori-
cal Note 8.1). Processing requirements for plastics led 
to the development of injection molding  (based on 
die casting, one of the metal casting processes) and 
other polymer shaping techniques.
Electronics products have imposed unusual de-
mands on manufacturing in terms of miniaturization. 
The evolution of the technology has been to package 
more and more devices into a smaller area—in some 
cases millions of transistors onto a ﬂ  at piece of semi-
conductor material that is only 12 mm (0.50 in) on a 
side. The history of electronics processing and pack-
aging dates from around 1960 (Historical Notes 33.1, 
34.1, and 34.2).
C01.indd   13C01.indd   13 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 14 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing
Three categories of processing operations are distinguished: (1) shaping opera-
tions, (2) property-enhancing operations, and (3) surface processing operations. 
Shaping operations  alter the geometry of the starting work material by vari-
ous methods. Common shaping processes include casting, forging, and machining. 
Property-enhancing operations  add value to the material by improving its physical 
properties without changing its shape. Heat treatment is the most common example. 
Surface processing operations  are performed to clean, treat, coat, or deposit mate-
rial onto the exterior surface of the work. Common examples of coating are plating 
and painting. Shaping processes are covered in Parts III through VI, corresponding 
to the four main categories of shaping processes in Figure 1.5. Property-enhancing 
processes and surface processing operations are covered in Part VII.
Shaping Processes  M o s t  s h a p e  p r o c e s s i n g  o p e r a t i o n s  a p p l y  h e a t ,  m e c h a n i c a l  
force or a combination of these to effect a change in geometry of the work material. 
There are various ways to classify the shaping processes. The classiﬁ  cation used in this 
book is based on the state of the starting material, by which there are four categories: 
(1) solidiﬁ  cation processes , in which the starting material is a heated liquid  or semif-
luid that cools and solidiﬁ  es to form the part geometry; (2) particulate processing , in 
which the starting material is a powder , and the powders are formed and heated into 
the desired geometry; (3) deformation processes , in which the starting material is a 
ductile solid  (commonly metal) that is deformed to shape the part; and (4) material 
removal processes , in which the starting material is a solid  (ductile or brittle), from 
which material is removed so that the resulting part has the desired geometry.
In the ﬁ  rst category, the starting material is heated sufﬁ  ciently to transform it into 
a liquid or highly plastic (semiﬂ  uid) state. Nearly all materials can be processed in 
this way. Metals, ceramic glasses, and plastics can all be heated to sufﬁ  ciently high 
temperatures to convert them into liquids. With the material in a liquid or semiﬂ  uid 
form, it can be poured or otherwise forced to ﬂ  ow into a mold cavity and allowed to 
solidify, thus taking a solid shape that is the same as the cavity. Most processes that 
operate this way are called casting or molding. Casting  is the name used for metals, 
and molding  is the common term used for plastics. This category of shaping process 
is depicted in Figure 1.6. Figure 11.1 shows a cast iron casting, and a collection of 
plastic molded parts is displayed in Figure 13.20.
In particulate processing , the starting materials are powders of metals or 
ceramics. Although these two materials are quite different, the processes to shape 
them in particulate processing are quite similar. The common technique in powder 
FIGURE 1.6 Casting 
and molding processes 
start with a work mate-
rial heated to a ﬂ  uid 
or semiﬂ  uid state. The 
process consists of 
(1) pouring the ﬂ  uid 
into a mold cavity and 
(2)  allowing the ﬂ  uid to 
solidify, after which the 
solid part is  removed 
from the mold.
C01.indd   14C01.indd   14 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 15
metallurgy involves pressing and sintering, illustrated in Figure 1.7, in which the 
powders are ﬁ  rst squeezed into a die cavity under high pressure and then heated 
to bond the individual particles together. Examples of parts produced by powder  
metallurgy are shown in Figure 15.1.
In the deformation processes , the starting work part is shaped by the application 
of forces that exceed the yield strength of the material. For the material to be formed 
in this way, it must be sufﬁ  ciently ductile to avoid fracture during deformation. To 
increase ductility (and for other reasons), the work material is often heated before 
forming to a temperature below the melting point. Deformation processes are asso-
ciated most closely with metalworking and include operations such as forging  and 
extrusion , shown in Figure 1.8. Figure 18.19 shows a forging operation performed by 
a drop hammer. 
Also included within the deformation processes category is sheet metalworking , 
which involves bending, forming, and shearing operations performed on starting 
blanks and strips of sheet metal. Several sheet metal parts, called stampings because 
they are made on a stamping press, are illustrated in Figure 19.35.
Material removal processes  are operations that remove excess material from the 
starting workpiece so that the resulting shape is the desired geometry. The most 
important processes in this category are machining  operations such as turning , FIGURE 1.7 
Particulate processing: 
(1) the starting material 
is powder; the usual 
process consists of 
(2) pressing and 
(3) sintering.
FIGURE 1.8 Some 
common deformation 
processes: (a) forging , 
in which two halves 
of a die squeeze the 
work part, causing it to 
assume the shape of 
the die cavity; and 
(b) extrusion , in which 
a billet is forced to ﬂ  ow 
through a die oriﬁ  ce, 
thus taking the cross-
sectional shape of the 
oriﬁ  ce.
C01.indd   15C01.indd   15 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM 16 Chapter 1/Introduction and Overview of Manufacturing
 drilling , and milling , shown in Figure 1.9. These cutting operations are most com-
monly applied to solid metals, performed using cutting tools that are harder and 
stronger than the work metal. The front cover of this book shows a turning operation. 
Grinding  is another common material removal process. Other processes in this 
category are known as nontraditional processes  because they use lasers, electron 
beams, chemical erosion, electric discharges, and electrochemical energy to remove 
material rather than cutting or grinding tools.
It is desirable to minimize waste and scrap in converting a starting work part into 
its subsequent geometry. Certain shaping processes are more efﬁ  cient than others in 
terms of material conservation. Material removal processes (e.g., machining) tend to 
be wasteful of material, simply by the way they work. The material removed from the 
starting shape is waste, at least in terms of the unit operation. Other processes, such 
as certain casting and molding operations, often convert close to 100% of the start-
ing material into ﬁ  nal product. Manufacturing processes that transform nearly all of 
the starting material into product and require no subsequent machining to achieve 
ﬁ nal part geometry are called net shape processes . Other processes require mini-
mum machining to produce the ﬁ  nal shape and are called near net shape processes .
Property-Enhancing Processes  The second major type of part processing 
is performed to improve mechanical or physical properties of the work material. 
These processes do not alter the shape of the part, except unintentionally in some 
cases.  The most important property-enhancing processes involve heat treatments , 
which include various annealing and strengthening processes for metals and glasses. 
 Sintering  of powdered metals is also a heat treatment that strengthens a pressed 
powder metal work part. Its counterpart in ceramics is called ﬁ  ring .
Surface Processing  S u r f a c e  p r o c e s s i n g  o p e r a t i o n s  i n c l u d e  ( 1 )  c l e a n i n g ,  ( 2 )  s u r -
face treatments, and (3) coating and thin ﬁ  lm deposition processes . Cleaning  includes 
both chemical and mechanical processes to remove dirt, oil, and other contaminants 
from the surface. Surface treatments  include mechanical working such as shot peen-
ing and sand blasting, and physical processes such as diffusion and ion implanta-
tion. Coating  and thin ﬁ  lm deposition  processes apply a coating of material to the 
exterior surface of the work part. Common coating processes include electroplating , Single point
cutting toolFeed toolRotation
(work)WorkpieceStarting
diameter ChipDiameter
after turning
(a) (b) (c)Drill bit
Work part
Work
HoleFeed
FeedRotation
Rotation
Material
removedMilling
cutter
FIGURE 1.9 Common machining operations: (a) turning , in which a single-point cutting tool removes metal from 
a rotating workpiece to reduce its diameter; (b) drilling , in which a rotating drill bit is fed into the work to create a 
round hole; and (c) milling , in which a work part is fed past a rotating cutter with multiple edges.
C01.indd   16C01.indd   16 10/07/12   9:11 AM10/07/12   9:11 AM Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 17
anodizing  of aluminum, organic coating  (call it painting ), and porcelain enameling. 
Thin ﬁ  lm deposition processes include physical vapor deposition  a n d  chemical 
vapor deposition  to form extremely thin coatings of various substances.
Several surface-processing operations have been adapted to fabricate semi-
conductor materials into integrated circuits for microelectronics. These processes 
include chemical vapor deposition, physical vapor deposition, and oxidation. They 
are applied to very localized areas on the surface of a thin wafer of silicon (or other 
semiconductor material) to create the microscopic circuit.