Introduction 
and Overview of 
Manufacturing 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Contents 
1.1 What Is Manufacturing? 
1.1.1 Manufacturing Defined 
1.1.2 Manufacturing Industries and 
Products 
1.1.3 Manufacturing Capability 
1.2 Materials in Manufacturing 
1.2.1 Metals 
1.2.2 Ceramics 
1.2.3 Polymers 
1.2.4 Composites 
1.3 Manufacturing Processes 
1.3.1 Processing Operations 
1.3.2 Assembly Operations 
1.3.3 Production Machines and Tooling 
1.4 Production Systems 
1.4.1 Production Facilities 
1.4.2 Manufacturing Support Systems 
1.5 Manufacturing Economics 
1.5.1 Production Cycle Time Analysis 
1.5.2 Manufacturing Cost Models 
1.6 Recent Developments in Manufacturing 
Making things has been an essential activity of human 
civilizations since before recorded history. Today, the 
term manufacturing is used for this activity. For techno- 
logical and economic reasons, manufacturing is impor- 
tant to the welfare of the United States and most other 
developed and developing nations. Technology can be 
defined as the application of science to provide society 
and its members with those things that are needed or 
desired. Technology affects our daily lives, directly and 
indirectly, in many ways. Consider the list of products in 
Table 1.1. They represent various technologies that help our 
society and its members to live better. What do all these 
products have in common? They are all manufac- tured. 
These technological wonders would not be avail- able to 
our society if they could not be manufactured. 
Manufacturing is the critical factor that makes technol- 
ogy possible. 
Economically, manufacturing is an important means 
by which a nation creates material wealth. In the Unit- 
ed States, the manufacturing industries account for 
only about 12% of gross domestic product (GDP). A 
country’s natural resources, such as agricultural lands, 
mineral deposits, and oil reserves, also create wealth. 
In the U.S., agriculture, mining, and similar industries 
account for less than 5% of GDP (agriculture alone is 
only about 1%). Construction and public utilities make 
up around 5%. The rest is service industries, which in- 
clude retail, transportation, banking, communication, 
education, and government. The service sector ac- 
counts for more than 75% of U.S. GDP. Government 
(federal, state, and local) accounts for more of GDP 
than the manufacturing sector; however, government 
services do not create wealth. In the modern global 
economy, a nation must have a strong manufacturing 
base (or it must have significant natural resources) if it 
is to provide a strong economy and a high standard of 
living for its people. 
1 
1 
Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 
2 
 
 
TABLE • 1.1 Products representing various technologies, most of which affect nearly all of us. 
 
Athletic shoes 
E-book reader 
One-piece molded plastic patio chair 
Automatic teller machine 
Fax machine 
Optical scanner 
Automatic dishwasher 
Hand-held electronic calculator 
Personal computer (PC) 
Ballpoint pen 
High density PC diskette 
Photocopying machine 
Camcorder 
Home security system 
Pull-tab beverage cans 
Cell phone 
Hybrid gas-electric automobile 
Quartz crystal wrist watch 
Compact disc (CD) 
Industrial robot 
Self-propelled mulching lawnmower 
Compact disc player 
Ink-jet color printer 
Smart phone 
Compact fluorescent light bulb 
LCD and Plasma TVs 
Supersonic aircraft 
Contact lenses 
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) 
Tablet computer 
Digital camera 
machine for medical diagnosis 
Tennis racket of composite materials 
Digital video disc (DVD) 
Medicines 
Video games 
Digital video disc player 
Microwave oven 
Washing machine and dryer 
 
 
This opening chapter considers some general topics about manufacturing. What is 
manufacturing? How is it organized in industry? What are the materials, processes, 
and systems by which it is accomplished? 
 
What Is Manufacturing? 
The word manufacture is derived from two Latin words, manus (hand) and factus 
(make); the combination means made by hand. The English word manufacture is 
several centuries old, and “made by hand” accurately described the manual methods 
used when the word was first coined.1 Most modern manufacturing is accomplished 
by automated and computer-controlled machinery (Historical Note 1.1). 
 
 
 
1As a noun, the word manufacture first appeared in English around 1567 A.D. As a verb, it first appeared 
around 1683 A.D. 
. 
 
The history of manufacturing can be separated into  weapons, scrolls, pottery and glassware, and other 
two subjects: (1) the discovery and invention of mate-  products of the time, but the procedures were largely 
rials and processes to make things, and (2) the devel-  based on handicraft. 
opment of the systems of production. The materials   The systems aspects of manufacturing are examined 
and processes to make things predate the systems  here, and the materials and processes are discussed in 
by several millennia. Some of the processes—casting, Historical Note 1.2. Systems of manufacturing refer 
hammering (forging), and grinding—date back 6000 to the ways of organizing people and equipment so years 
or more. The early fabrication of implements and that production can be performed more efficiently. weapons 
was accomplished more as crafts and trades
Several historical events and discoveries stand out than 
manufacturing as it is known today. The ancient as having had a major impact on the development of Romans 
had what might be called factories to produce  modern manufacturing systems. 
Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 
3 
 
 
 
Certainly one significant discovery was the principle 
of division of labor—dividing the total work into tasks 
and having individual workers each become a special- 
ist at performing only one task. This principle had been 
practiced for centuries, but the economist Adam Smith 
(1723–1790) is credited with first explaining its eco- 
nomic significance in The Wealth of Nations. 
The Industrial Revolution (circa 1760–1830) had 
a major impact on production in several ways. It 
marked the change from an economy based on agri- 
culture and handicraft to one based on industry and 
manufacturing. The change began in England, where a 
series of machines were invented and steam power 
replaced water, wind, and animal power. These ad- 
vances gave British industry significant advantages 
over other nations, and England attempted to restrict 
export of the new technologies. However, the revo- 
lution eventually spread to other European countries 
and the United States. Several inventions of the Indus- 
trial Revolution greatly contributed to the development 
of manufacturing: (1) Watt’s steam engine—a new 
power-generating technology for industry; (2) machine 
tools, starting with John Wilkinson’s boring machine 
around 1775 (Historical Note 21.1); (3) the spinning 
jenny, power loom, and other machinery for the tex- 
tile industry that permitted significant increases in 
productivity; and (4) the factory system—a new way 
of organizing large numbers of production workers 
based on division of labor. 
While England was leading the industrial revolu- 
tion, an important concept was being introduced in the 
United States: interchangeable parts manufacture. 
Much credit for this concept is given to Eli Whitney 
(1765–1825), although its importance had been rec- 
ognized by others [10]. In 1797, Whitney negotiated 
a contract to produce 10,000 muskets for the U.S. 
government. The traditional way of making guns at the 
time was to custom-fabricate each part for a par- ticular 
gun and then hand-fit the parts together by fil- ing. 
Each musket was unique, and the time to make it was 
considerable. Whitney believed that the com- ponents 
could be made accurately enough to permit parts 
assembly without fitting. After several years of 
development in his Connecticut factory, he traveled to 
Washington in 1801 to demonstrate the principle. 
He laid out components for 10 muskets before gov- 
ernment officials, including Thomas Jefferson, and 
proceeded to select parts randomly to assemble the 
guns. No special filing or fitting was required, and 
all of the guns worked perfectly. The secret be- hind his 
achievement was the collection of special machines, 
fixtures, and gages that he had developed in 
his 
factory. Interchangeable parts manufacture 
required many years of development before becom- 
ing a practical reality, but it revolutionized methods of 
manufacturing. It is a prerequisite for mass produc- 
tion. Because its origins were in the United States, 
interchangeable parts production came to be known as 
the American System of manufacture. 
The mid- and late 1800s witnessed the expan- sion 
of railroads, steam-powered ships, and other machines 
that created a growing need for iron and steel. New 
steel production methods were devel- oped to meet 
this demand (Historical Note 6.1). Also during this 
period, several consumer products were developed, 
including 
the 
sewing 
machine, 
bicycle, 
and 
automobile. To meet the mass demand for these 
products, more efficient production methods were 
required. Some historians identify developments dur- 
ing this period as the Second Industrial Revolution, 
characterized in terms of its effects on manufacturing 
systems by (1) mass production, (2) scientific manage- 
ment movement, (3) assembly lines, and (4) electrifi- 
cation of factories. 
In the late 1800s, the scientific management 
movement was developing in the United States in 
response to the need to plan and control the activi- ties 
of growing numbers of production workers. The 
movement’s leaders included Frederick W. Taylor 
(1856–1915), Frank Gilbreth (1868–1924), and his wife 
Lillian (1878–1972). Scientific management included 
several features [3]: (1) motion study, aimed at find- 
ing the best method to perform a given task; (2) time 
study, to establish work standards for a job; (3) exten- 
sive use of standards in industry; (4) the piece rate 
system and similar labor incentive plans; and (5) use 
of data collection, record keeping, and cost account- 
ing in factory operations. 
Henry Ford (1863–1947) introduced the assembly 
line in 1913 at his Highland Park, Michigan plant. The 
assembly line made possible the mass production of 
complex consumer products. Use of assembly line 
methods permitted Ford to sell a Model T automobile 
for as little as $500, thus making ownership of cars 
feasible for a large segment of the U.S. population. 
In 1881, the first electric power generating station 
had been built in New York City, and soon electric mo- 
tors were being used as a power source to operate fac- 
tory machinery. This was a far more convenient power 
delivery system than steam engines, which required 
overhead belts to distribute power to the machines. By 
1920, electricity had overtaken steam as the principal 
power source in U.S. factories. The twentieth century 
was a time of more technological advances than in all 
other centuries combined. Many of these develop- 
ments resulted in the automation of manufacturing. 
Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 
4 
 
 
 
 
Scrap and 
waste 
Manufacturing 
process 
 
 
 
 
 
Starting 
material 
Processed 
part 
$ 
 
$$$ 
 
 
 
 
Starting 
material 
Material in 
processing 
Processed 
part 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
FIGURE 1.1  Two ways to define manufacturing: (a) as a technical process, and (b) as an economic process. 
 
 
1.1.1 MANUFACTURING DEFINED 
 
As a field of study in the modern context, manufacturing can be defined two ways, 
one technologic, and the other economic. Technologically, manufacturing is the ap- 
plication of physical and chemical processes to alter the geometry, properties, and/ 
or appearance of a given starting material to make parts or products; manufacturing 
also includes assembly of multiple parts to make products. The processes to accom- 
plish manufacturing involve a combination of machinery, tools, power, and labor, as 
depicted in Figure 1.1(a). Manufacturing is almost always carried out as a sequence 
of operations. Each operation brings the material closer to the desired final state. 
Economically, manufacturing is the transformation of materials into items of 
greater value by means of one or more processing and/or assembly operations, as 
depicted in Figure 1.1(b). The key point is that manufacturing adds value to the 
material by changing its shape or properties, or by combining it with other materials 
that have been similarly altered. The material has been made more valuable through 
the manufacturing operations performed on it. When iron ore is converted into steel, value 
is added. When sand is transformed into glass, value is added. When petroleum is 
refined into plastic, value is added. And when plastic is molded into the complex 
geometry of a patio chair, it is made even more valuable. 
Figure 1.2 shows a product on the left and the starting workpiece from which the 
circular frame of the product was produced on the right. The starting workpiece is 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1.2 A mechanical 
heart value on the left and the 
titanium workpiece from which 
the frame is machined on the 
right. (Courtesy of George E. 
Kane Manufacturing Technology 
Laboratory, Lehigh University.) 
Machinery 
Tooling 
Power 
Labor 
Manufacturing 
process 
 
Value 
added $$ 
 
Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 
5 
 
 
a titanium billet, and the product consists of a carbon wafer assembled to the hook 
that protrudes from the right of the frame. The product is an artificial heart valve 
costing thousands of dollars, well worth it for patients who need one. (By the way, 
the surgeon who installs it charges several more thousand dollars.) The titanium 
billet costs a small fraction of the selling price. It measures about 25 mm (1 in) 
in diameter. The frame was machined (a material removal process, Section 1.3.1) 
from the starting billet. Machining time was about one hour. Note the added value 
provided by this operation. Note also the waste in the unit operation, as depicted in 
Figure 1.1(a); the finished frame has only about 5% of the mass of the starting 
workpiece (although the titanium swarf can be recycled). 
The words manufacturing and production are often used interchangeably. The 
author’s view is that production has a broader meaning than manufacturing. To illus- trate, 
one might speak of “crude oil production,” but the phrase “crude oil manufac- 
turing” seems out of place. Yet when used in the context of products such as metal 
parts or automobiles, either word seems okay. 
 
 
1.1.2 MANUFACTURING INDUSTRIES AND PRODUCTS 
 
Manufacturing is an important commercial activity performed by companies that 
sell products to customers. The type of manufacturing done by a company depends 
on the kinds of products it makes. 
 
Manufacturing Industries 
Industry consists of enterprises and organizations that 
produce or supply goods and services. Industries can be classified as primary, second- ary, 
or tertiary. Primary industries cultivate and exploit natural resources, such as 
agriculture and mining. 
 
but construction and power utilities are also included. 
Tertiary industries constitute the service sector of the economy. A list of specific 
industries in these categories is presented in Table 1.2. 
 
TABLE • 1.2 Specific industries in the primary, secondary, and tertiary categories. 
 
Primary 
Secondary 
Tertiary (service) 
Agriculture 
Forestry 
Fishing 
Livestock 
Quarries 
Mining 
Petroleum 
Aerospace 
Food processing 
Apparel 
Glass, ceramics 
Automotive 
Heavy machinery 
Basic metals 
Paper 
Beverages 
Petroleum refining 
Building materials 
Pharmaceuticals 
Chemicals 
Plastics (shaping) 
Computers 
Power utilities 
Construction 
Publishing 
Consumer appliances 
Textiles 
Electronics 
Tire and rubber 
Equipment 
Wood and furniture 
Fabricated metals 
Banking 
Insurance 
Communications 
Legal 
Education 
Real estate 
Entertainment 
Repair and 
Financial services 
maintenance 
Government 
Restaurant 
Health and medical 
Retail trade 
Hotel 
Tourism 
Information 
Transportation 
Wholesale trade 
cipal activity in this category, 
Secondary industries take the outputs of the primary indus- 
tries and convert them into consumer and capital goods. Manufacturing is the prin- 
Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 
6 
 
 
This book is concerned with the secondary industries in Table 1.2, which include 
the companies engaged in manufacturing. However, the International Standard 
Industrial Classification (ISIC) used to compile Table 1.2 includes several industries 
whose production technologies are not covered in this text; for example, beverages, 
chemicals, and food processing. In this book, manufacturing means production of 
hardware, which ranges from nuts and bolts to digital computers and military weap- 
ons. Plastic and ceramic products are included, but apparel, paper, pharmaceuticals, 
power utilities, publishing, and wood products are excluded. 
 
Manufactured Products Final products made by the manufacturing industries 
can be divided into two major classes: consumer goods and capital goods. Consumer goods 
are products purchased directly by consumers, such as cars, personal comput- ers, TVs, 
tires, and tennis rackets. Capital goods are those purchased by companies to produce 
goods and/or provide services. Examples of capital goods include aircraft, computers, 
communication equipment, medical apparatus, trucks and buses, railroad locomotives, 
machine tools, and construction equipment. Most of these capital goods are purchased 
by the service industries. It was noted in the introduction that manu- facturing 
accounts for about 12% of gross domestic product and services about 75% of GDP in 
the United States. Yet the manufactured capital goods purchased by the service 
sector are the enablers of that sector. Without the capital goods, the service 
industries could not function. 
In addition to final products, other manufactured items include the materials, 
components, tools, and supplies used by the companies that make the final products. 
Examples of these items include sheet steel, bar stock, metal stampings, machined 
parts, plastic moldings and extrusions, cutting tools, dies, molds, and lubricants. 
Thus, the manufacturing industries consist of a complex infrastructure with vari- 
ous categories and layers of intermediate suppliers with whom the final consumer 
never deals. 
This book is generally concerned with discrete items—individual parts and 
assembled products rather than items produced by continuous processes. A metal 
stamping is a discrete item, but the sheet-metal coil from which it is made is continu- 
ous (almost). Many discrete parts start out as continuous or semicontinuous prod- 
ucts, such as extrusions and electrical wire. Long sections made in almost continuous 
lengths are cut to the desired size. An oil refinery is a better example of a continuous 
process. 
 
Production Quantity and Product Variety The quantity of products made by a 
factory has an important influence on the way its people, facilities, and procedures 
are organized. Annual production quantities can be classified into three ranges: (1) 
low production, quantities in the range 1 to 100 units per year; (2) medium produc- 
tion, from 100 to 10,000 units annually; and (3) high production, 10,000 to millions 
of units. The boundaries between the three ranges are somewhat arbitrary (author’s 
judgment). Depending on the kinds of products, these boundaries may shift by an 
order of magnitude or so. 
Production quantity refers to the number of units produced annually of a particu- 
lar product type. Some plants produce a variety of different product types, each type being 
made in low or medium quantities. Other plants specialize in high production of only 
one product type. It is instructive to identify product variety as a parameter distinct 
from production quantity. Product variety refers to different product designs or types 
that are produced in the plant. Different products have different shapes and 
Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1.3 Relationship 
between product variety and 
production quantity in discrete 
product manufacturing. 
 
sizes; they perform different functions; they are intended for different markets; some have 
more components than others; and so forth. The number of different product types 
made each year can be counted. When the number of product types made in the 
factory is high, this indicates high product variety. 
There is an inverse correlation between product variety and production quantity 
in terms of factory operations. If a factory’s product variety is high, then its produc- 
tion quantity is likely to be low; but if production quantity is high, then product vari- 
ety will be low, as depicted in Figure 1.3. Manufacturing plants tend to specialize in a 
combination of production quantity and product variety that lies somewhere inside 
the diagonal band in Figure 1.3. 
Although product variety has been identified as a quantitative parameter (the 
number of different product types made by the plant or company), this parameter is 
much less exact than production quantity because details on how much the designs 
differ are not captured simply by the number of different designs. Differences 
between an automobile and an air conditioner are far greater than between an air 
conditioner and a heat pump. Within each product type, there are differences among 
specific models. 
The extent of the product differences may be small or great, as illustrated in the 
automotive industry. Each of the U.S. automotive companies produces cars with two 
or three different nameplates in the same assembly plant, although the body styles 
and other design features are virtually the same. In different plants, the company 
builds heavy trucks. The terms “soft” and “hard” might be used to describe these 
differences in product variety. Soft product variety occurs when there are only small 
differences among products, such as the differences among car models made on the 
same production line. In an assembled product, soft variety is characterized by a 
high proportion of common parts among the models. Hard product variety occurs 
when the products differ substantially, and there are few common parts, if any. The 
difference between a car and a truck exemplifies hard variety. 
 
 
1.1.3 MANUFACTURING CAPABILITY 
 
A manufacturing plant consists of a set of processes and systems (and people, of 
course) designed to transform a certain limited range of materials into products of 
increased value. These three building blocks—materials, processes, and systems— 
constitute the subject of modern manufacturing. There is a strong interdependence 
among these factors. A company engaged in manufacturing cannot do everything. 
Section 1.1/What Is Manufacturing? 
8 
 
 
It must do only certain things, and it must do those things well. Manufacturing ca- 
pability refers to the scope of technical and physical capabilities and limitations of 
a manufacturing company and each of its plants. Manufacturing capability has three 
dimensions: (1) technological processing capability, (2) physical size and weight of 
product, and (3) production capacity. 
 
Technological Processing Capability The technological processing capabil- ity 
of a plant (or company) is its available set of manufacturing processes. Certain plants 
perform machining operations, others roll steel billets into sheet stock, and others build 
automobiles. A machine shop cannot roll steel, and a rolling mill can- not build cars. 
The underlying feature that distinguishes these plants is the processes they can 
perform. Technological processing capability is closely related to material type. 
Certain manufacturing processes are suited to certain materials, whereas other 
processes are suited to other materials. By specializing in a certain process or group of 
processes, the plant is simultaneously specializing in certain material types. Tech- 
nological processing capability includes not only the physical processes, but also the 
expertise possessed by plant personnel in these processing technologies. Companies 
must concentrate on the design and manufacture of products that are compatible 
with their technological processing capability. 
 
Physical Product Limitations A second aspect of manufacturing capability is 
imposed by the physical product. A plant with a given set of processes is limited in 
terms of the size and weight of the products that can be accommodated. Large, 
heavy products are difficult to move. To move these products about, the plant must 
be equipped with cranes of the required load capacity. Smaller parts and products 
made in large quantities can be moved by conveyor or other means. The limitation 
on product size and weight extends to the physical capacity of the manufacturing 
equipment as well. Production machines come in different sizes. Larger machines 
must be used to process larger parts. The production and material handling equip- 
ment must be planned for products that lie within a certain size and weight range. 
 
Production Capacity A third limitation on a plant’s manufacturing capability 
is the production quantity that can be produced in a given time period (e.g., month 
or year). This quantity limitation is commonly called plant capacity, or production 
capacity, defined as the maximum rate of production that a plant can achieve under 
assumed operating conditions. The operating conditions refer to number of shifts 
per week, hours per shift, direct labor manning levels in the plant, and so on. These 
factors represent inputs to the manufacturing plant. Given these inputs, how much 
output can the factory produce? 
Plant capacity is usually measured in terms of output units, such as annual tons of steel 
produced by a steel mill, or number of cars produced by a final assembly plant. In 
these cases, the outputs are homogeneous. In cases in which the output units are not 
homogeneous, other factors may be more appropriate measures, such as avail- able 
labor hours of productive capacity in a machine shop that produces a variety of 
parts. 
Materials, processes, and systems are the basic building blocks of manufacturing 
and the three broad subject areas of this book. This introductory chapter provides 
an overview of these three subjects before embarking on a detailed coverage in the 
remaining chapters. 
Section 1.2/Materials in Manufacturing 
9 
 
 
Materials in Manufacturing 
Most engineering materials can be classified into one of three basic categories: 
(1) metals, (2) ceramics, and (3) polymers. Their chemistries are different, their 
mechanical and physical properties are different, and these differences affect the 
manufacturing processes that can be used to produce products from them. In addi- 
tion to the three basic categories, there are (4) composites—nonhomogeneous mix- 
tures of the other three basic types rather than a unique category. The classification 
of the four groups is pictured in Figure 1.4. This section provides a survey of these 
materials. Chapters 6 through 9 cover the four material types in more detail. 
 
 
1.2.1 METALS 
 
Metals used in manufacturing are usually alloys, which are composed of two or 
more elements, with at least one being a metallic element. Metals and alloys can be 
divided into two basic groups: (1) ferrous, and (2) nonferrous. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1.4 
Classification of the 
four engineering 
materials. 
1.2 
 
Ferrous Metals 
 
 
 
Metals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Nonferrous 
Metals 
 
 
 
Crystalline 
Ceramics 
 
 
 
Ceramics 
 
 
 
 
 
Glasses 
 
Engineering 
Materials 
 
 
 
 
Thermoplastics 
 
 
 
 
 
Polymers 
 
 
Thermosets 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Elastomers 
 
 
 
Metal Matrix 
Composites 
 
 
 
 
Composites 
 
 
Ceramic Matrix 
Composites 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Polymer Matrix 
Composites 
 
 
Section 1.2/Materials in Manufacturing 
10 
 
 
Ferrous Metals Ferrous metals are based on iron; the group includes steel and cast 
iron. These metals constitute the most important group commercially, more than three-
fourths of the metal tonnage throughout the world. Pure iron has limited com- mercial 
use, but when alloyed with carbon, iron has more uses and greater commer- cial value 
than any other metal. Alloys of iron and carbon form steel and cast iron. 
Steel can be defined as an iron–carbon alloy containing 0.02% to 2.11% carbon. It 
is the most important category within the ferrous metal group. Its composition often 
includes other alloying elements as well, such as manganese, chromium, nickel, and 
molybdenum, to enhance the properties of the metal. Applications of steel include 
construction (bridges, I-beams, and nails), transportation (trucks, rails, and rolling 
stock for railroads), and consumer products (automobiles and appliances). 
Cast iron is an alloy of iron and carbon (2% to 4%) used in casting (primarily 
sand casting). Silicon is also present in the alloy (in amounts from 0.5% to 3%), and 
other elements are often added also, to obtain desirable properties in the cast part. 
Cast iron is available in several different forms, of which gray cast iron is the most 
common; its applications include blocks and heads for internal combustion engines. 
Nonferrous Metals Nonferrous metals include the other metallic elements and their 
alloys. In almost all cases, the alloys are more important commercially than the pure 
metals. The nonferrous metals include the pure metals and alloys of aluminum, copper, 
gold, magnesium, nickel, silver, tin, titanium, zinc, and other metals. 
 
1.2.2 CERAMICS 
 
A ceramic is defined as a compound containing metallic (or semimetallic) and nonme- 
tallic elements. Typical nonmetallic elements are oxygen, nitrogen, and carbon. Ceram- 
ics include a variety of traditional and modern materials. Traditional ceramics, some of 
which have been used for thousands of years, include: clay (abundantly available, con- 
sisting of fine particles of hydrous aluminum silicates and other minerals used in mak- 
ing brick, tile, and pottery); silica (the basis for nearly all glass products); and alumina 
and silicon carbide (two abrasive materials used in grinding). Modern ceramics include 
some of the preceding materials, such as alumina, whose properties are enhanced in 
various ways through modern processing methods. Newer ceramics include: carbides— 
metal carbides such as tungsten carbide and titanium carbide, which are widely used 
as cutting tool materials; and nitrides—metal and semimetal nitrides such as titanium 
nitride and boron nitride, used as cutting tools and grinding abrasives. 
For processing purposes, ceramics can be divided into crystalline ceramics and 
glasses. Different methods of manufacturing are required for the two types. 
Crystalline ceramics are formed in various ways from powders and then fired (heated 
to a temperature below the melting point to achieve bonding between the powders). 
The glass ceramics (namely, glass) can be melted and cast, and then formed in proc- 
esses such as traditional glass blowing. 
 
1.2.3 POLYMERS 
 
A polymer is a compound formed of repeating structural units called mers, whose 
atoms share electrons to form very large molecules. Polymers usually consist of 
carbon plus one or more other elements such as hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and 
chlorine. Polymers are divided into three categories: (1) thermoplastic polymers, 
(2) thermosetting polymers, and (3) elastomers. 
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 
11 
 
 
Thermoplastic polymers can be subjected to multiple heating and cooling cycles 
without substantially altering the molecular structure of the polymer. Common 
thermoplastics include polyethylene, polystyrene, polyvinylchloride, and nylon. 
Thermosetting polymers chemically transform (cure) into a rigid structure upon 
cooling from a heated plastic condition; hence the name thermosetting. Members 
of this type include phenolics, amino resins, and epoxies. Although the name “ther- 
mosetting” is used, some of these polymers cure by mechanisms other than heating. 
Elastomers are polymers that exhibit significant elastic behavior; hence the name 
elastomer. They include natural rubber, neoprene, silicone, and polyurethane. 
 
 
1.2.4 COMPOSITES 
 
Composites do not really constitute a separate category of materials; they are mix- 
tures of the other three types. A composite is a material consisting of two or more 
phases that are processed separately and then bonded together to achieve proper- 
ties superior to those of its constituents. The term phase refers to a homogeneous 
mass of material, such as an aggregation of grains of identical unit cell structure in a 
solid metal. The usual structure of a composite consists of particles or fibers of one 
phase mixed in a second phase, called the matrix. 
Composites are found in nature (e.g., wood), and they can be produced synthetically. 
The synthesized type is of greater interest here, and it includes glass fibers in a polymer 
matrix, such as fiber-reinforced plastic; polymer fibers of one type in a matrix of a sec- 
ond polymer, such as an epoxy-Kevlar composite; and ceramic in a metal matrix, such 
as a tungsten carbide in a cobalt binder to form a cemented carbide cutting tool. 
Properties of a composite depend on its components, the physical shapes of the 
components, and the way they are combined to form the final material. Some com- 
posites combine high strength with light weight and are suited to applications such 
as aircraft components, car bodies, boat hulls, tennis rackets, and fishing rods. Other 
composites are strong, hard, and capable of maintaining these properties at elevated 
temperatures, for example, cemented carbide cutting tools. 
 
Manufacturing Processes 
A manufacturing process is a designed procedure that results in physical and/or 
chemical changes to a starting work material with the intention of increasing the 
value of that material. A manufacturing process is usually carried out as a unit oper- ation, 
which means that it is a single step in the sequence of steps required to trans- form 
the starting material into a final product. Manufacturing operations can be divided 
into two basic types: (1) processing operations and (2) assembly operations. A 
processing operation transforms a work material from one state of completion to 
a more advanced state that is closer to the final desired product. It adds value by 
changing the geometry, properties, or appearance of the starting material. In general, 
processing operations are performed on discrete work parts, but certain processing 
operations are also applicable to assembled items (e.g., painting a spot-welded car 
body). An assembly operation joins two or more components to create a new entity, 
called an assembly, subassembly, or some other term that refers to the joining proc- 
ess (e.g., a welded assembly is called a weldment). A classification of manufacturing 
processes is presented in Figure 1.5. Some of the basic processes used in modern 
manufacturing date from antiquity (Historical Note 1.2). 
1.3 
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 
12 
 
Material 
removal 
Solidification 
processes 
Manufacturing 
processes 
Processing 
operations 
Particulate 
processing 
Shaping 
processes 
Assembly 
operations 
Coating and 
deposition processes 
Deformation 
processes 
Adhesive 
bonding 
Brazing and 
soldering 
Permanent 
joining processes 
Welding 
Cleaning and 
surface treatments 
Surface processing 
operations 
Permanent 
fastening methods 
Mechanical 
fastening 
Threaded 
fasteners 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1.5 
Classification of 
manufacturing 
processes. 
 
 
 
 
 
Property 
enhancing processes 
Heat 
treatment 
Historical Note 1.2 
Manufacturing materials and processes 
 
Although most of the historical developments that form  Gold was found by early humans in relatively pure form 
the modern practice of manufacturing have occurred  
in nature; it could be hammered into shape. Copper 
only during the last few centuries (Historical Note 1.1), was probably the first metal to be extracted from ores, 
several of the basic fabrication processes date as far thus requiring smelting as a processing technique. 
back as the Neolithic period (circa 8000–3000 B.C.E.). It Copper could not be hammered readily because it 
was during this period that processes such as the fol-  strain hardened; instead, it was shaped by casting 
lowing were developed: carving and other woodwork- 
 (Historical Note 10.1). Other metals used during this 
ing, hand forming and firing of clay pottery, grinding  period were silver and tin. It was discovered that cop- 
and polishing of stone, spinning and weaving of tex-  per alloyed with tin produced a more workable metal 
tiles, and dyeing of cloth. 
 
 than copper alone (casting and hammering could both 
Metallurgy and metalworking also began during 
be used). This heralded the important period known as 
the Neolithic period, in Mesopotamia and other areas 
the Bronze Age (circa 3500–1500 B.C.). 
around the Mediterranean. It either spread to, or de- 
 
Iron was also first smelted during the Bronze Age. 
veloped independently in, regions of Europe and Asia. 
Meteorites may have been one source of the metal, 
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 
13 
 
 
 
but iron ore was also mined. Temperatures required to 
reduce iron ore to metal are significantly higher than for 
copper, which made furnace operations more difficult. 
Other processing methods were also more difficult for 
the same reason. Early blacksmiths learned that when 
certain irons (those containing small amounts of car- 
bon) were sufficiently heated and then quenched, 
they became very hard. This permitted grinding a very 
sharp cutting edge on knives and weapons, but it also 
made the metal brittle. Toughness could be increased 
by reheating at a lower temperature, a process known 
as tempering. What we have described is, of course, 
the heat treatment of steel. The superior properties of 
steel caused it to succeed bronze in many applica- 
tions (weaponry, agriculture, and mechanical devices). 
The period of its use has subsequently been named 
the Iron Age (starting around 1000 B.C.). It was not un- 
til much later, well into the nineteenth century, that the 
demand for steel grew significantly and more modern 
steelmaking techniques were developed (Historical 
Note 6.1). 
The beginnings of machine tool technology oc- 
curred during the Industrial Revolution. During the peri- 
od 1770–1850, machine tools were developed for most 
of the conventional material removal processes, 
such as boring, turning, drilling, milling, shaping, 
and planing (Historical Note 21.1). Many of the individ- 
ual processes predate the machine tools by centuries; 
for example, drilling and sawing (of wood) date from 
ancient times, and turning (of wood) from around the 
time of Christ. 
Assembly methods were used in ancient cultures to 
make ships, weapons, tools, farm implements, 
machinery, chariots and carts, furniture, and garments. 
The earliest processes included binding with twine 
and rope, riveting and nailing, and soldering. Around 
2000 years ago, forge welding and adhesive bond- 
ing had been developed. Widespread use of screws, 
bolts, and nuts as fasteners—so common in today’s 
assembly—required the development of machine tools 
that could accurately cut the required helical shapes 
(e.g., Maudsley’s screw cutting lathe, 1800). It was not 
until around 1900 that fusion welding proc- esses 
started to be developed as assembly techniques 
(Historical Note 28.1). 
Natural rubber was the first polymer to be used in 
manufacturing (if we exclude wood, which is a polymer 
composite). The vulcanization process, discovered by 
Charles Goodyear in 1839, made rubber a useful engi- 
neering material (Historical Note 8.2). Subsequent de- 
velopments included plastics such as cellulose nitrate 
in 1870, Bakelite in 1900, polyvinylchloride in 1927, pol- 
yethylene in 1932, and nylon in the late 1930s (Histori- 
cal Note 8.1). Processing requirements for plastics led 
to the development of injection molding (based on die 
casting, one of the metal casting processes) and other 
polymer shaping techniques. 
Electronics products have imposed unusual de- 
mands on manufacturing in terms of miniaturization. 
The evolution of the technology has been to package 
more and more devices into a smaller area—in some 
cases millions of transistors onto a flat piece of semi- 
conductor material that is only 12 mm (0.50 in) on a 
side. The history of electronics processing and pack- 
aging dates from around 1960 (Historical Notes 33.1, 
34.1, and 34.2). 
 
 
 
1.3.1 PROCESSING OPERATIONS 
 
A processing operation uses energy to alter a work part’s shape, physical properties, 
or appearance to add value to the material. The forms of energy include mechani- 
cal, thermal, electrical, and chemical. The energy is applied in a controlled way by 
means of machinery and tooling. Human energy may also be required, but the hu- 
man workers are generally employed to control the machines, oversee the opera- 
tions, and load and unload parts before and after each cycle of operation. A general 
model of a processing operation is illustrated in Figure 1.1(a). Material is fed into the 
process, energy is applied by the machinery and tooling to transform the material, 
and the completed work part exits the process. Most production operations produce 
waste or scrap, either as a natural aspect of the process (e.g., removing material as in 
machining) or in the form of occasional defective pieces. It is an important objective 
in manufacturing to reduce waste in either of these forms. 
More than one processing operation is usually required to transform the starting 
material into final form. The operations are performed in the particular sequence 
required to achieve the geometry and condition defined by the design specification. 
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 
14 
 
 
Three categories of processing operations are distinguished: (1) shaping opera- 
tions, (2) property-enhancing operations, and (3) surface processing operations. 
Shaping operations alter the geometry of the starting work material by vari- 
ous methods. Common shaping processes include casting, forging, and machining. 
Property-enhancing operations add value to the material by improving its physical 
properties without changing its shape. Heat treatment is the most common example. 
Surface processing operations are performed to clean, treat, coat, or deposit mate- 
rial onto the exterior surface of the work. Common examples of coating are plating 
and painting. Shaping processes are covered in Parts III through VI, corresponding 
to the four main categories of shaping processes in Figure 1.5. Property-enhancing 
processes and surface processing operations are covered in Part VII. 
 
Shaping Processes Most shape processing operations apply heat, mechanical 
force or a combination of these to effect a change in geometry of the work material. 
There are various ways to classify the shaping processes. The classification used in this 
book is based on the state of the starting material, by which there are four categories: 
(1) solidification processes, in which the starting material is a heated liquid or semif- luid 
that cools and solidifies to form the part geometry; (2) particulate processing, in which 
the starting material is a powder, and the powders are formed and heated into the 
desired geometry; (3) deformation processes, in which the starting material is a 
ductile solid (commonly metal) that is deformed to shape the part; and (4) material 
removal processes, in which the starting material is a solid (ductile or brittle), from 
which material is removed so that the resulting part has the desired geometry. 
In the first category, the starting material is heated sufficiently to transform it into 
a liquid or highly plastic (semifluid) state. Nearly all materials can be processed in 
this way. Metals, ceramic glasses, and plastics can all be heated to sufficiently high 
temperatures to convert them into liquids. With the material in a liquid or semifluid 
form, it can be poured or otherwise forced to flow into a mold cavity and allowed to 
solidify, thus taking a solid shape that is the same as the cavity. Most processes that 
operate this way are called casting or molding. Casting is the name used for metals, 
and molding is the common term used for plastics. This category of shaping process 
is depicted in Figure 1.6. Figure 11.1 shows a cast iron casting, and a collection of 
plastic molded parts is displayed in Figure 13.20. 
In particulate processing, the starting materials are powders of metals or 
ceramics. Although these two materials are quite different, the processes to shape 
them in particulate processing are quite similar. The common technique in powder 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1.6 Casting 
and molding processes 
start with a work mate- 
rial heated to a fluid 
or semifluid state. The 
process consists of 
(1) pouring the fluid 
into a mold cavity and 
(2) allowing the fluid to 
solidify, after which the 
solid part is removed 
from the mold. 
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 
15 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1.7 
Particulate processing: 
(1) the starting material 
is powder; the usual 
process consists of 
(2) pressing and 
(3) sintering. 
 
 
metallurgy involves pressing and sintering, illustrated in Figure 1.7, in which the 
powders are first squeezed into a die cavity under high pressure and then heated to 
bond the individual particles together. Examples of parts produced by powder 
metallurgy are shown in Figure 15.1. 
In the deformation processes, the starting work part is shaped by the application 
of forces that exceed the yield strength of the material. For the material to be formed 
in this way, it must be sufficiently ductile to avoid fracture during deformation. To 
increase ductility (and for other reasons), the work material is often heated before 
forming to a temperature below the melting point. Deformation processes are asso- 
ciated most closely with metalworking and include operations such as forging and 
extrusion, shown in Figure 1.8. Figure 18.19 shows a forging operation performed by 
a drop hammer. 
Also included within the deformation processes category is sheet metalworking, 
which involves bending, forming, and shearing operations performed on starting 
blanks and strips of sheet metal. Several sheet metal parts, called stampings because 
they are made on a stamping press, are illustrated in Figure 19.35. 
Material removal processes are operations that remove excess material from the 
starting workpiece so that the resulting shape is the desired geometry. The most 
important processes in this category are machining operations such as turning, 
 
 
FIGURE 1.8 Some 
common deformation 
processes: (a) forging, 
in which two halves 
of a die squeeze the 
work part, causing it to 
assume the shape of 
the die cavity; and 
(b) extrusion, in which 
a billet is forced to flow 
through a die orifice, 
thus taking the cross- 
sectional shape of the 
orifice. 
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 
16 
 
 
 
Workpiece 
 
 
Rotation 
(work) 
Starting 
diameter Chip 
Diameter 
after turning 
 
 
 
 
Drill bit 
Work part 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Work 
 
 
 
Milling 
 
 
 
Rotation 
 
 
 
 
Material 
removed 
 
Feed tool 
Single point 
cutting tool 
Hole 
 
Feed 
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
 
FIGURE 1.9  Common machining operations: (a) turning, in which a single-point cutting tool removes metal from 
a rotating workpiece to reduce its diameter; (b) drilling, in which a rotating drill bit is fed into the work to create a 
round hole; and (c) milling, in which a work part is fed past a rotating cutter with multiple edges. 
 
 
drilling, and milling, shown in Figure 1.9. These cutting operations are most com- 
monly applied to solid metals, performed using cutting tools that are harder and 
stronger than the work metal. The front cover of this book shows a turning operation. 
Grinding is another common material removal process. Other processes in this 
category are known as nontraditional processes because they use lasers, electron 
beams, chemical erosion, electric discharges, and electrochemical energy to remove 
material rather than cutting or grinding tools. 
It is desirable to minimize waste and scrap in converting a starting work part into 
its subsequent geometry. Certain shaping processes are more efficient than others in terms 
of material conservation. Material removal processes (e.g., machining) tend to be 
wasteful of material, simply by the way they work. The material removed from the starting 
shape is waste, at least in terms of the unit operation. Other processes, such as certain 
casting and molding operations, often convert close to 100% of the start- ing material 
into final product. Manufacturing processes that transform nearly all of the starting 
material into product and require no subsequent machining to achieve final part 
geometry are called net shape processes. Other processes require mini- mum 
machining to produce the final shape and are called near net shape processes. 
 
Property-Enhancing Processes The second major type of part processing is 
performed to improve mechanical or physical properties of the work material. 
These processes do not alter the shape of the part, except unintentionally in some 
cases. The most important property-enhancing processes involve heat treatments, 
which include various annealing and strengthening processes for metals and glasses. 
Sintering of powdered metals is also a heat treatment that strengthens a pressed 
powder metal work part. Its counterpart in ceramics is called firing. 
 
Surface Processing Surface processing operations include (1) cleaning, (2) sur- 
face treatments, and (3) coating and thin film deposition processes. Cleaning includes 
both chemical and mechanical processes to remove dirt, oil, and other contaminants 
from the surface. Surface treatments include mechanical working such as shot peen- 
ing and sand blasting, and physical processes such as diffusion and ion implanta- tion. 
Coating and thin film deposition processes apply a coating of material to the exterior 
surface of the work part. Common coating processes include electroplating, 
cutter 
Rotation 
Feed 
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 
17 
 
 
anodizing of aluminum, organic coating (call it painting), and porcelain enameling. 
Thin film deposition processes include physical vapor deposition and chemical vapor 
deposition to form extremely thin coatings of various substances. 
Several surface-processing operations have been adapted to fabricate semi- 
conductor materials into integrated circuits for microelectronics. These processes 
include chemical vapor deposition, physical vapor deposition, and oxidation. They 
are applied to very localized areas on the surface of a thin wafer of silicon (or other 
semiconductor material) to create the microscopic circuit. 
 
 
1.3.2 ASSEMBLY OPERATIONS 
 
The second basic type of manufacturing operation is assembly, in which two or more 
separate parts are joined to form a new entity. Components of the new entity are 
connected either permanently or semipermanently. Permanent joining processes 
include welding, brazing, soldering, and adhesive bonding. They form a joint be- 
tween components that cannot be easily disconnected. Certain mechanical assem- 
bly methods are available to fasten two (or more) parts together in a joint that can 
be conveniently disassembled. The use of screws, bolts, and other threaded fasten- 
ers are important traditional methods in this category. Other mechanical assembly 
techniques form a more permanent connection; these include rivets, press fitting, 
and expansion fits. Special joining and fastening methods are used in the assembly 
of electronic products. Some of the methods are identical to or are adaptations of 
the preceding processes, for example, soldering. Electronics assembly is concerned 
primarily with the assembly of components such as integrated circuit packages to 
printed circuit boards to produce the complex circuits used in so many of today’s 
products. Joining and assembly processes are discussed in Part VIII, and the special- 
ized assembly techniques for electronics are described in Chapter 34. 
 
 
1.3.3 PRODUCTION MACHINES AND TOOLING 
 
Manufacturing operations are accomplished using machinery and tooling (and peo- 
ple). The extensive use of machinery in manufacturing began with the Industrial 
Revolution. It was at that time that metal cutting machines started to be developed 
and widely used. These were called machine tools—power-driven machines used 
to operate cutting tools previously operated by hand. Modern machine tools are 
described by the same basic definition, except that the power is electrical rather than water 
or steam, and the level of precision and automation is much greater today. Machine 
tools are among the most versatile of all production machines. They are used to 
make not only parts for consumer products, but also components for other 
production machines. Both in a historic and a reproductive sense, the machine tool 
is the mother of all machinery. 
Other production machines include presses for stamping operations, forge ham- 
mers for forging, rolling mills for rolling sheet metal, welding machines for weld- 
ing, and insertion machines for inserting electronic components into printed circuit 
boards. The name of the equipment usually follows from the name of the process. 
Production equipment can be general purpose or special purpose. General purpose 
equipment is more flexible and adaptable to a variety of jobs. It is commercially availa- ble 
for any manufacturing company to invest in. Special purpose equipment is usually 
designed to produce a specific part or product in very large quantities. The economics 
Section 1.3/Manufacturing Processes 
18 
 
 
 
TABLE • 1.3 
processes. 
Production equipment and tooling used for various manufacturing 
 
Process 
Equipment 
Special tooling (function) 
Casting 
Molding 
Rolling 
Forging 
Extrusion 
Stamping 
Machining 
 
 
Grinding 
Welding 
a 
 
Molding machine 
Rolling mill 
Forge hammer or press 
Press 
Press 
Machine tool 
 
 
Grinding machine 
Welding machine 
Mold (cavity for molten metal) 
Mold (cavity for hot polymer) 
Roll (reduce work thickness) 
Die (squeeze work to shape) 
Extrusion die (reduce cross-section) 
Die (shearing, forming sheet metal) 
Cutting tool (material removal) 
Fixture (hold work part) 
Jig (hold part and guide tool) 
Grinding wheel (material removal) 
Electrode (fusion of work metal) 
Fixture (hold parts during welding) 
aVarious types of casting setups and equipment (Chapter 11). 
 
of mass production justify large investments in special purpose machinery to achieve high 
efficiencies and short cycle times. This is not the only reason for special purpose 
equipment, but it is the dominant one. Another reason may be because the process 
is unique and commercial equipment is not available. Some companies with unique 
processing requirements develop their own special purpose equipment. 
Production machinery usually requires tooling that customizes the equipment for 
the particular part or product. In many cases, the tooling must be designed specifically 
for the part or product configuration. When used with general purpose equipment, it is 
designed to be exchanged. For each work part type, the tooling is fastened to the 
machine and the production run is made. When the run is completed, the tooling is 
changed for the next work part type. When used with special purpose machines, the 
tooling is often designed as an integral part of the machine. Because the special purpose 
machine is likely being used for mass production, the tooling may never need changing 
except for replacement of worn components or for repair of worn surfaces. 
The type of tooling depends on the type of manufacturing process. In Table 1.3, 
we list examples of special tooling used in various operations. Details are provided 
in the chapters that discuss these processes. 
 
Production Systems 
To operate effectively, a manufacturing firm must have systems that allow it to ef- 
ficiently accomplish its type of production. Production systems consist of people, 
equipment, and procedures designed for the combination of materials and processes that 
constitute a firm’s manufacturing operations. Production systems can be divided into 
two categories: (1) production facilities and (2) manufacturing support systems, as 
shown in Figure 1.10.2 Production facilities refer to the physical equipment and the 
arrangement of equipment in the factory. Manufacturing support systems are 
 
2 This diagram also indicates the major topic areas covered in this book. 
.4 
Section 1.4/Production Systems 
19 
 
 
 
Production system 
 
Manufacturing 
support systems 
 
 
 
Manufacturing 
systems 
 
 
 
Quality control 
systems 
Manufacturing 
support 
 
 
 
 
 
Facilities 
FIGURE 1.10 Model of 
the production system 
and overview of major 
topics in the book. 
Engineering 
materials 
Manufacturing processes and assembly operations 
 
the procedures used by the company to manage production and solve the techni- 
cal and logistics problems encountered in ordering materials, moving work through 
the factory, and ensuring that products meet quality standards. Both categories in- 
clude people. People make these systems work. In general, direct labor workers are 
responsible for operating the manufacturing equipment; and professional staff 
workers are responsible for manufacturing support. 
 
 
1.4.1 PRODUCTION FACILITIES 
 
Production facilities consist of the factory and the production, material handling, 
and other equipment in the factory. The equipment comes in direct physical contact 
with the parts and/or assemblies as they are being made. The facilities “touch” the 
product. Facilities also include the way the equipment is arranged in the factory— 
the plant layout. The equipment is usually organized into logical groupings. In this 
book they are called manufacturing systems, such as an automated production line, 
or a machine cell consisting of an industrial robot and two machine tools. 
A manufacturing company attempts to design its manufacturing systems and 
organize its factories to serve the particular mission of each plant in the most effi- 
cient way. Over the years, certain types of production facilities have come to be 
recognized as the most appropriate way to organize for a given combination of prod- 
uct variety and production quantity, as discussed in Section 1.1.2. Different types of 
facilities are required for each of the three ranges of annual production quantities. 
 
Low-Quantity Production  In the low-quantity range (1–100 units/year), the term job 
shop is often used to describe the type of production facility. A job shop makes low 
quantities of specialized and customized products. The products are typically 
complex, such as space capsules, prototype aircraft, and special machinery. The 
equipment in a job shop is general purpose, and the labor force is highly skilled. 
A job shop must be designed for maximum flexibility to deal with the wide prod- 
uct variations encountered (hard product variety). If the product is large and heavy, 
and therefore difficult to move, it typically remains in a single location during its fab- 
rication or assembly. Workers and processing equipment are brought to the product, 
rather than moving the product to the equipment. This type of layout is referred to 
as a fixed-position layout, shown in Figure 1.11(a). In a pure situation, the product 
Finished 
products 
Section 1.4/Production Systems 
20 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
Worker 
Workstation 
Equipment 
Conveyor 
 
 
 
v 
 
 
Cell 
Cell 
(c) 
Workers 
 
(d) 
FIGURE 1.11  Various types of plant layout: (a) fixed-position layout, (b) process layout, (c) cellular layout, and 
(d) product layout. 
 
remains in a single location during its entire production. Examples of such products 
include ships, aircraft, locomotives, and heavy machinery. In actual practice, these 
items are usually built in large modules at single locations, and then the completed 
modules are brought together for final assembly using large-capacity cranes. 
The individual components of these large products are often made in factories in 
which the equipment is arranged according to function or type. This arrangement 
is called a process layout. The lathes are in one department, the milling machines 
are in another department, and so on, as in Figure 1.11(b). Different parts, each 
requiring a different operation sequence, are routed through the departments in the 
particular order needed for their processing, usually in batches. The process layout 
is noted for its flexibility; it can accommodate a great variety of operation sequences 
for different part configurations. Its disadvantage is that the machinery and methods to 
produce a part are not designed for high efficiency. 
 
Medium Quantity Production 
In the medium-quantity range (100–10,000 units 
annually), two different types of facility are distinguished, depending on product 
variety. When product variety is hard, the usual approach is batch production, in 
which a batch of one product is made, after which the manufacturing equipment is 
changed over to produce a batch of the next product, and so on. The production rate 
of the equipment is greater than the demand rate for any single product type, and so 
the same equipment can be shared among multiple products. The changeover between 
production runs takes time—time to change tooling and set up the machin- ery. This 
setup time is lost production time, and this is a disadvantage of batch manu- facturing. 
Batch production is commonly used for make-to-stock situations, in which 
Product 
Equipment 
(mobile) 
Workers 
Departments 
Work unit 
Production 
machines 
Section 1.4/Production Systems 
21 
 
 
items are manufactured to replenish inventory that has been gradually depleted by 
demand. The equipment is usually arranged in a process layout, as in Figure 1.11(b). 
An alternative approach to medium-range production is possible if product vari- 
ety is soft. In this case, extensive changeovers between one product style and the 
next may not be necessary. It is often possible to configure the manufacturing sys- 
tem so that groups of similar products can be made on the same equipment without 
significant lost time because of setup. The processing or assembly of different parts 
or products is accomplished in cells consisting of several workstations or machines. 
The term cellular manufacturing is often associated with this type of production. 
Each cell is designed to produce a limited variety of part configurations; that is, the 
cell specializes in the production of a given set of similar parts, according to the 
principles of group technology (Section 39.5). The layout is called a cellular layout, 
depicted in Figure 1.11(c). 
High Production The high-quantity range (10,000 to millions of units per year) is 
referred to as mass production. The situation is characterized by a high demand rate 
for the product, and the manufacturing system is dedicated to the production of that 
single item. Two categories of mass production can be distinguished: quantity produc- tion 
and flow line production. Quantity production involves the mass production of 
single parts on single pieces of equipment. It typically involves standard machines 
(e.g., stamping presses) equipped with special tooling (e.g., dies and material handling 
devices), in effect dedicating the equipment to the production of one part type. Typi- 
cal layouts used in quantity production are the process layout and cellular layout. 
Flow line production involves multiple pieces of equipment or workstations 
arranged in sequence, and the work units are physically moved through the sequence to 
complete the product. The workstations and equipment are designed specifically for 
the product to maximize efficiency. The layout is called a product layout, and the 
workstations are arranged into one long line, as in Figure 1.11(d), or into a series of 
connected line segments. The work is usually moved between stations by mecha- 
nized conveyor. At each station, a small amount of the total work is completed on 
each unit of product. 
The most familiar example of flow line production is the assembly line, associ- 
ated with products such as cars and household appliances. The pure case of flow line 
production occurs when there is no variation in the products made on the line. Every 
product is identical, and the line is referred to as a single model production line. To 
successfully market a given product, it is often beneficial to introduce feature and 
model variations so that individual customers can choose the exact merchandise that 
appeals to them. From a production viewpoint, the feature differences represent a 
case of soft product variety. The term mixed-model production line applies to these 
situations in which there is soft variety in the products made on the line. Modern 
automobile assembly is an example. Cars coming off the assembly line have varia- 
tions in options and trim representing different models and in many cases different 
nameplates of the same basic car design. 
 
1.4.2 MANUFACTURING SUPPORT SYSTEMS 
 
To operate its facilities efficiently, a company must organize itself to design the proc- esses 
and equipment, plan and control the production orders, and satisfy product quality 
requirements. These functions are accomplished by manufacturing sup- port 
systems—people and procedures by which a company manages its production 
Section 1.4/Production Systems 
22 
 
 
operations. Most of these support systems do not directly contact the product, but 
they plan and control its progress through the factory. Manufacturing support func- 
tions are often carried out in the firm by people organized into departments such as 
the following: 
 
➢ Manufacturing engineering. The manufacturing engineering department is re- 
sponsible for planning the manufacturing processes—deciding what processes 
should be used to make the parts and assemble the products. This department is 
also involved in designing and ordering the machine tools and other equipment 
used by the operating departments to accomplish processing and assembly. 
➢ Production planning and control. This department is responsible for solv- ing 
the logistics problem in manufacturing—ordering materials and purchased 
parts, scheduling production, and making sure that the operating departments 
have the necessary capacity to meet the production schedules. 
➢ Quality control. Producing high-quality products should be a top priority of any 
manufacturing firm in today’s competitive environment. It means designing and 
building products that conform to specifications and satisfy or exceed customer 
expectations. Much of this effort is the responsibility of the QC department. 
 
Manufacturing Economics 
In Section 1.1.1, manufacturing was defined as a transformation process that adds 
value to a starting work material. In Section 1.1.2, we noted that manufacturing is 
a commercial activity performed by companies that sell products to customers. It is 
appropriate to consider some of the economic aspects of manufacturing, and that is 
the purpose of this section. Our coverage consists of (1) production cycle time analy- 
sis and (2) manufacturing cost models. 
 
 
1.5.1 
PRODUCTION CYCLE TIME ANALYSIS 
 
“Time is money”, as the saying goes. The total time to make a product is one of the 
components that determine its total cost and the price that can be charged for it. The 
total time is the sum of all of the individual cycle times of the unit operations needed 
to manufacture the product. As defined in Section 1.3, a unit operation is a single step 
in the sequence of steps required to make the final product. The cycle time of a unit 
operation is defined as the time that one work unit spends being processed or assem- 
bled. It is the time interval between when one work unit begins the operation and 
the next unit begins. A typical production cycle time consists of the actual processing time 
plus the work handling time, for example, loading and unloading the part in the 
machine. In some processes, such as machining, time is also required to periodically 
change the tooling used in the operation when it wears out. In equation form, 
Tc = To 1 Th 1 Tt 
(1.1) 
where Tc = cycle time of the unit operation, min/pc; To = actual processing time in 
the operation, min/pc; Th = work handling time, min/pc; and Tt = tool handling time 
if that applies in the operation, min/pc. As indicated, the tool handling time usually 
occurs periodically, not every cycle, so the time per workpiece must be determined 
by dividing the actual time associated with changing the tool by the number of pieces 
.5 
Section 1.5/Manufacturing Economics 
23 
 
 
between tool changes. It should be mentioned that many production operations do 
not include a tool change, so that term is omitted from Equation (1.1) in those cases. 
Batch and job shop production are common types of manufacturing. The time 
to produce a batch of parts in a unit operation consists of the time to set up for the 
batch plus the actual run time. This can be summarized as follows: 
 
Tb = Tsu + QTc 
(1.2) 
 
where Tb = total time to complete the batch, min/batch; Tsu = setup time, min/batch; 
Q = batch quantity, number of pieces (pc); and Tc = cycle time as defined in Equa- 
tion (1.1), min/pc. To obtain a realistic value of the average production time per 
piece, the setup time is spread over the batch quantity, as follows: 
T = Tsu + T = Tsu + QTc = Tb  
(1.3) 
 
 
p 
Q 
c 
Q 
Q 
where Tp = average production time per piece, min/pc; and the other terms are de- 
fined above. 
If the batch size is one part, then Equations (1.2) and (1.3) are still applicable, and 
Q = 1. In high production (mass production), these equations can also be used, but 
the value of Q is so large that the setup time loses significance: As Q → oo, Tsu/Q → 0. 
The average production time per piece in Equation (1.3) can be used to deter- 
mine the actual average production rate in the operation: 
R = 60 
p 
Tp
 
 
(1.4) 
where Rp = average hourly production rate, pc/hr. This production rate includes the 
effect of setup time. During the production run (after the machine is set up), the 
production rate is the reciprocal of the cycle time: 
R = 60 
c 
Tc
 
 
(1.5) 
where Rc = hourly cycle rate, cycles/hr or pc/hr. These equations indicate that the 
cycle rate will always be larger than the actual production rate unless the setup time 
is zero (Rc > Rp). 
 
 
1.5.2 MANUFACTURING COST MODELS 
 
In this section, the cycle time analysis is used to estimate the costs of production, 
which include not only the cost of time but also material and overhead. The cost of 
time consists of labor and equipment costs, which are applied to the average produc- 
tion time per piece as cost rates (e.g., $/hr). Thus, our cost model for production cost 
per piece can be stated as follows: 
Cpc = Cm + (CL + Ceq)Tp + Ct 
(1.6) 
where Cpc = cost per piece, $/pc; Cm = starting material cost, $/pc; CL = labor cost 
rate, $/min; Ceq = equipment cost rate, $/min; Ct = cost of tooling that is used in the 
unit operation, $/pc; and Tp = average production time per piece, min/pc. If appli- 
cable, the cost of tooling Ct must be determined by dividing the actual cost of the 
tooling by the number of pieces between tool changes. 
Section 1.5/Manufacturing Economics 
24 
 
 
Overhead Costs The two cost rates, CL and Ceq, include overhead costs, which 
consist of all of the expenses of operating the company other than material, labor, 
and equipment. Overhead costs can be divided into two categories: (1) factory over- 
head and (2) corporate overhead. Factory overhead consists of the costs of running 
the factory excluding materials, direct labor, and equipment. This overhead category 
includes plant supervision, maintenance, insurance, heat and light, and so forth. A 
worker who operates a piece of equipment may earn an hourly wage of $15/hr, but 
when fringe benefits and other overhead costs are figured in, the worker may cost 
the company $30/hr. Corporate overhead consists of company expenses not related 
to the factory, such as sales, marketing, accounting, legal, engineering, research and 
development, office space, utilities, and health benefits.3 These functions are required in 
the company, but they are not directly related to the cost of manufacturing. On the other 
hand, for pricing the product, they must be added in, or else the company will lose 
money on every product it sells. 
J Black [1] offers some estimates of the typical costs associated with manufac- 
turing a product, presented in Figure 1.12. Several observations are worth making 
here. First, total manufacturing costs constitute only 40% of the product’s selling 
price. Corporate overhead expenses (Engineering, Research and development, 
Administration, sales, marketing, etc.) add up to almost as much as manufacturing 
cost. Second, parts and materials are 50% of total manufacturing cost, so that is 
about 20% of selling price. Third, direct labor is only about 12% of manufacturing 
cost, so that is less than 5% of selling price. Factory overhead, which includes the 
categories Plant and machinery, depreciation, energy at 26% and Indirect labor at 
12%, adds up to more than three times Direct labor cost. 
The issue of overhead costs can become quite complicated. A more complete 
treatment can be found in [7] and most introductory accounting textbooks. Our 
approach in this book is simply to include an appropriate overhead expense in our 
labor and equipment cost rates. For example, the labor cost rate is 
RH 
C = 
(1 + R  
) 
(1.7) 
L 
60 
LOH 
where CL = labor cost rate, $/min; RH = worker’s hourly wage rate, $/hr; and RLOH = 
labor overhead rate, %. 
Research and 
development 
Manufacturing cost 
Engineering 
Administration, 
sales, marketing, 
etc. 
Profit 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 1.12 
Typical break- 
down of costs for 
a manufactured 
product [1]. 
 
3Health benefits, if available from the company, are fringe benefits that apply to all regular employees, 
and so they would be included in the direct labor overhead in the factory as well as the corporate offices. 
40% 
15% 
5% 
25% 
15% 
 
 
 
Plant and 
machinery, 
Direct 
depreciation, 
Indirect 
labor 
energy, etc. 
labor 
Parts and materials 
12% 
26% 
12% 
50% 
 
 
Section 1.5/Manufacturing Economics 
25 
 
 
Equipment Cost Rate The cost of production equipment used in the factory is a 
fixed cost, meaning that it remains constant for any level of production output. It is 
a capital investment that is made in the hope that it will pay for itself by producing 
a revenue stream that ultimately exceeds its cost. The company puts up the money 
to purchase the equipment as an initial cost, and then the equipment pays back over 
a certain number of years until it is replaced or disposed of. This is different from 
direct labor and material costs, which are variable costs, meaning they are paid for 
as they are used. Direct labor cost is a cost per time ($/min), and Material cost is a 
cost per piece ($/pc). 
In order to determine an equipment cost rate, the initial cost plus installation cost 
of the equipment must be amortized over the number of minutes it is used during its 
lifetime. The equipment cost rate is defined by the following: 
Ceq =  IC  (1 + ROH) 
(1.8) 
60NH 
where Ceq = equipment cost rate, $/min; IC = initial cost of the equipment, $; N = 
anticipated number of years of service; H = annual number of hours of operation, 
hr/yr; and ROH = applicable overhead rate for the equipment, %. 
 
 
Example 1.1 
Equipment 
cost rate 
A production machine is purchased for an initial cost plus installation of 
$500,000. Its anticipated life = 7 years. The machine is planned for a two-shift 
operation, eight hours per shift, and five days per week. Assume 50 weeks per 
year. The applicable overhead rate on this type of equipment = 35%. Deter- 
mine the equipment cost rate. 
Solution: The number of hours of operation per year H = 50(2)(5)(8) = 
4000 hr/yr. Using Equation (1.8), we have 
Ceq =   500,000  (1 + 0.35) = $0.402/min == $24.11/hr 
60(7)(4000) 
 
 
 
 
Example 1.2 
Cycle time and 
cost per piece 
The production machine in Example 1.1 is used to produce a batch of parts 
that each has a starting material cost = $2.35. Batch quantity = 100. The actual 
processing time in the operation = 3.72 min. Time to load and unload each 
workpiece = 1.60 min. Tool cost = $4.40, and each tool can be used for 20 
pieces before it is changed, which takes 2.0 min. Before production can begin, 
the machine must be set up, which takes 2.5 hr. Hourly wage rate of the opera- 
tor = $16.50/hr, and the applicable labor overhead rate = 40%. Determine (a) 
the cycle time for the piece, (b) average production rate when setup time is 
figured in, and (c) cost per piece. 
Solution: (a) For Equation (1.1), processing time To = 3.72 min, part handling 
time Th = 1.50 min, and tool handling time Tt = 2.00 min/20 = 0.10 min. 
Tc = 3.72 + 1.60 + 0.10 = 5.42 min/pc 
 
Section 1.5/Manufacturing Economics 
26 
 
 
 
 
Equipment reliability and scrap rate of parts are sometimes issues in produc- 
tion. Equipment reliability is represented by the term availability (denoted by the 
symbol A), which is simply the proportion uptime of the equipment. For example, if 
A = 97%, then for every 100 hours of machine operation, we would expect on aver- 
age that the machine would be running for 97 hours and be down for maintenance 
and repairs for 3 hours. Scrap rate refers to the proportion of parts produced that 
are defective. Let q denote the scrap rate. In batch production, more than the speci- 
fied batch quantity are often produced to compensate for the losses due to scrap. 
Let Q = the required quantity of parts to be delivered and Qo = the starting quan- 
tity. The following equation can be used to determine how many starting parts are 
needed on average to satisfy an order for Q finished parts: 
Q 
Qo = 1 - q 
 
(1.9) 
 
Example 1.3 
Scrap rate 
A customer has ordered a batch of 1,000 parts to be produced by a machine 
shop. Historical data indicates that the scrap rate on this type of part = 4%. 
How many parts should the machine shop plan to make in order to account 
for this scrap rate? 
Solution: Given Q = 1,000 parts and q = 4% = 0.04, then the starting quan- 
tity is determined as follows: 
Q =  1000  = 1000 = 1041.7 rounded to 1042 starting parts 
o 
1 - 0.04 
0.96 
 
 
 
Of course, in modern manufacturing practice, every effort is made to minimize scrap 
rate, with the goal being zero defects. Availability and scrap rate also figure into cal- 
culations of production rate and part cost, as demonstrated in Example 1.4. 
 
 
 
100 
 
 
 
6.92 
(c) The equipment cost rate from Example 1.1 is Ceq = $0.402/min ($24.11/hr). 
The labor rate is calculated as follows: 
 
 
60 
 
 
Section 1.6/Recent Developments in Manufacturing 
27 
 
 
Example 1.4 
Cycle time and 
cost per piece 
A high-production operation manufactures a part for the automotive indus- 
try. Starting material cost = $1.75, and cycle time = 2.20 min. Equipment cost 
rate = $42.00/hr, and labor cost rate = $24.00/hr, including overhead costs in 
both cases. Availability of the production machine in this job = 97%, and the 
scrap rate of parts produced = 5%. Because this is a long-running job, setup 
time is ignored, and there is no tooling cost to be considered. (a) Determine 
the production rate and finished part cost in this operation. (b) If availability 
could be increased to 100% and scrap rate could be reduced to 0, what would 
be the production rate and finished part cost? 
Solution: (a) Production rate, including effect of availability 
R =  60  (0.97) = 26.45 pc/hr 
p 
2.20 
However, because of the 5% scrap rate, the production rate of acceptable 
parts is 
Rp = 26.45(1 - 0.05) = 25.13 pc/hr 
Because of availability and scrap rate, the part cost is 
Cpc =  
1.75 
 + 
( 
2.20 
) = $4.47/pc 
(24 + 42) 
(1 - 0.05) 
(0.97) 
60(1 - 0.05) 
(b) If A = 100% and q = 0,  Rp =  60  = 27.27 pc/hr. 
2.20 
Part cost Cpc = 1.75 + (42 + 24)(2.20/60) = $4.17/pc. 
This is an 8.5% increase in production rate and a 6.7% reduction in cost. 
 
 
Recent Developments in Manufacturing 
Manufacturing materials, processes, and systems have been the object of devel- 
opment for thousands of years (Historical Notes 1.1 and 1.2). In this section, we 
want to focus on developments that are of more recent vintage, say within the last 
25 to 50 years. The discussion is organized around the following topic areas: 
(1) microelectronics, (2) computerization of manufacturing, (3) flexible manufactur- 
ing, (4) microfabrication and nanotechnology, (5) lean production and Six Sigma, 
(6) globalization, and (7) environmentally conscious manufacturing. 
 
Microelectronics Microelectronics involves electronic devices that are fabri- 
cated on a microscopic scale. Examples include integrated circuits, which consist of 
components such as transistors, diodes, and resistors that have been fabricated and 
electrically connected on a small flat chip, usually made of silicon. The remarkable 
feature about today’s microelectronics devices is the huge number of components 
that can be contained onto the chip. The capability to fabricate integrated circuits 
dates from the early 1960s and has advanced to the point where the current technol- 
ogy is called giga-scale integration, meaning that chips are being produced consist- 
ing of billions of components. Microelectronics has become so pervasive that a large 
.6 
Section 1.6/Recent Developments in Manufacturing 
28 
 
 
proportion of the common items used today are based on this technology. Two thirds 
of the products listed in Table 1.1 are either called electronics products or their func- 
tion and operation depend on electronics. In this book, the fabrication of integrated 
circuits is covered in Chapter 33 and electronics assembly in Chapter 34. 
 
Computerization of Manufacturing The first digital computers date from the 
mid-1940s, but their applications in manufacturing came quite a few years later. In the 
mid-1960s direct numerical control was developed, in which mainframe com- puters 
were employed to remotely control machine tools in factories. As computer technology 
developed, enabled by advances in microelectronics, the cost of comput- ers and data 
processing was reduced, leading to the widespread use of personal com- puters, not 
only in the office but also in the factory for tasks ranging from control of individual 
equipment on the shop floor to control of the information required to manage the entire 
enterprise. The Internet has allowed manufacturing companies to communicate among 
their own geographically distributed plants and offices, and it has also provided access 
to customers and suppliers around the world. In this book, several aspects of 
computerization of manufacturing are included in Parts X and XI on manufacturing 
systems (Chapters 37 and 38) and manufacturing support systems (Chapters 39 and 
40). 
 
Flexible Manufacturing During most of the twentieth century, the emphasis in 
the manufacturing industries in the United States was on mass production to sat- 
isfy the consumer demands of a rapidly growing population. Mass production is still 
widely used in the United States and throughout the world, but computerization has 
enabled manufacturing companies to develop systems that are able to cope with 
product variations. The reader encountered several instances of this manufacturing 
flexibility in Section 1.4.1 in the discussion of production facilities. Cellular manu- 
facturing and mixed-model assembly lines are two examples of manually operated 
manufacturing systems that are capable of producing a variety of parts or products 
without the time-consuming downtime for changeover. The automobile industry, in 
particular, is designing its final assembly lines so that ever-greater model variations 
can be accommodated on a single line to meet changing and unpredictable demand 
patterns. Computerization has also allowed flexibility to be designed into automated 
systems, examples of which are the flexible manufacturing systems discussed in Sec- tion 
38.6. 
Closely related to flexible manufacturing is mass customization, which involves 
a production system that is capable of producing individualized products for each 
customer. The customer specifies the model and options, and the product is made to 
those specifications. Mass customization is discussed in Section 38.6.3. 
 
Microfabrication and Nanotechnology Another recent development in manu- 
facturing, closely related to microelectronics, is the introduction of materials and 
products whose dimensions are sometimes so small that they cannot be seen by the 
naked eye. In extreme cases, the items cannot even be seen under an optical micro- 
scope. Products that are so miniaturized require special fabrication technologies. 
Microfabrication refers to the processes needed to make parts and products whose 
features sizes are in the micrometer range (1 mm = 10-3 mm = 10-6m). Examples 
include ink-jet printing heads, compact discs (CDs and DVDs), and microsensors used 
in automotive applications (e.g., air-bag deployment sensors). Nanotechnol- ogy 
refers to materials and products whose feature sizes are in the nanometer scale 
Section 1.6/Recent Developments in Manufacturing 
29 
 
 
(1 nm = 10-3 mm = 10-6 mm = 10-9m), a scale that approaches the size of atoms and 
molecules. Ultra-thin coatings for catalytic converters, flat screen TV monitors, and 
cancer drugs are examples of products based on nanotechnology. The technological 
and economic importance of microscopic and nanoscopic materials and products is 
expected to increase in the future, and processes are needed to produce them com- 
mercially. Chapters 35 and 36 are devoted to these technologies. 
 
Lean Production and Six Sigma These are two programs aimed at improving 
efficiency and quality in manufacturing. They address demands by customers for 
products they buy to be both low in cost and high in quality. Lean production and Six 
Sigma are being widely adopted by companies, especially in the United States. 
Lean production is based on the Toyota Production System developed by Toyota 
Motors in Japan. Its origins date from the 1950s and 1960s when Toyota began using 
unconventional approaches to improve quality, reduce inventories, and increase 
flexibility in its operations. Lean production can be defined simply as “doing more 
work with fewer resources.”4 It means that fewer workers and less equipment are 
used to accomplish more production in less time, and yet achieve higher quality in 
the final product. The underlying objective of lean production is the elimination of 
various forms of waste, such as producing defective parts, excessive inventories, and 
workers waiting. Lean production is described in Sections 39.4 and 39.5 in our chap- 
ter on process planning and production control. 
Six Sigma was started in the 1980s at Motorola Corporation in the United States. 
The objective was to reduce variability in the company’s processes and products to 
increase customer satisfaction. Today, Six Sigma can be defined as “a quality-focused 
program that utilizes worker teams to accomplish projects aimed at improving an 
organization’s operational performance.”5 Six Sigma is discussed in more detail in 
Section 40.4.2. 
 
Globalization and Outsourcing The world is becoming more and more inte- 
grated, creating an international economy in which barriers once established by 
national boundaries have been reduced or eliminated. This has enabled a freer flow 
of goods and services, capital, technology, and people among regions and countries. 
Globalization is the term that describes this trend, which was recognized in the late 
1980s and is now a dominant economic reality. Of interest here is that once under- 
developed nations such as China, India, and Mexico have developed their manufac- 
turing infrastructures and technologies to a level such that they are now important 
producers in the global economy. These countries have large populations, and there- 
fore large workforces, and low labor costs. Hourly wages are significantly higher 
in the United States than in these countries, making it difficult for domestic U.S. 
companies to compete in many products that require high labor content. Examples 
include garments, furniture, toys, and electronic consumer products. The result has 
been a loss of manufacturing jobs in the United States and a gain of related work to 
these countries. 
Outsourcing is closely related to globalization. In manufacturing, outsourc- ing 
refers to the use of outside contractors to perform work that was traditionally 
 
4 M. P. Groover, Work Systems and the Methods, Measurement, and Management of Work [8], p. 514. The 
term lean production was coined by researchers at the Massachusetts Institute of Technology who studied 
the production operations at Toyota and other automobile companies in the 1980s. 
5 Ibid, p. 541. 
Section 1.6/Recent Developments in Manufacturing 
30 
 
 
accomplished in-house. Outsourcing can be done in several ways, including the use 
of local suppliers. In this case the jobs remain in the United States. Alternatively, 
U.S. companies can outsource to foreign countries, so that parts and products once 
made in the United States are now made outside the country. In this case U.S. jobs 
are displaced. Two possibilities can be distinguished: (1) offshore outsourcing, which 
refers to production in China or other overseas locations and transporting the items 
by cargo ship to the United States, and (2) near-shore outsourcing, which means the items 
are made in Canada, Mexico, or Central America and shipped by rail or truck into 
the United States. 
Outsourcing has resulted in the growth of contract manufacturers, companies 
that specialize in producing parts, subassemblies, and/or products for other com- 
panies. Contract manufacturers have developed expertise and efficiencies in cer- 
tain manufacturing operations, which means they can likely produce the contracted 
items at prices that are lower than the production costs of the customer company if 
it were the producer. Contract manufacturers include both domestic (U.S.) and 
foreign companies.6 Reasons why a company might prefer to use the services of a 
contract manufacturer include: (1) the company benefits from cost savings because 
it does not have to pay the factory expenses associated with production, (2) the 
company can focus its resources on design and marketing of products rather than 
manufacturing, and (3) the company may benefit from skills possessed by the con- 
tract manufacturer but not by itself. On the other hand, there are risks associated 
with contract manufacturing by the customer company. In turning over its prod- 
uct designs it loses control over its intellectual property, which might result in the 
contract manufacturer becoming a competitor. The distinction between a contract 
manufacturer and a supplier is perhaps subtle. A supplier is usually thought of as a 
company that provides materials and components for a customer who is engaged in 
production of a product, whereas a contract manufacturer accomplishes the whole 
production of the product. It may use suppliers itself. 
China is of particular interest in this discussion of globalization and outsourcing 
because of (1) its fast-growing economy (it now boasts the second largest gross domes- tic 
product in the world), (2) the importance of manufacturing in that economy, and 
(3) the extent to which U.S. companies have outsourced work to China. To take advan- tage 
of the low labor rates, many U.S. companies have moved much of their production to 
China (and other east Asian countries). Despite the logistics problems and costs of 
shipping the goods back into the United States, the result has been lower costs and 
higher profits for the outsourcing companies, as well as lower prices and a wider 
variety of available products for American consumers. The downside has been the loss 
of well-paying manufacturing jobs in the United States. Another consequence of U.S. 
outsourcing to China has been a reduction in the relative contribution of the manufac- 
turing sector to GDP. In the 1990s, the manufacturing industries accounted for about 
20% of GDP in the United States. Today, that contribution is only about 12%. At the 
same time, the manufacturing sector in China has grown (along with the rest of its 
economy), now accounting for about 35% of Chinese GDP. 
Recently, there have been signs that outsourcing of production to China by 
American companies may be declining, and that manufacturing jobs are being 
brought back to the U.S. There are several reasons for this trend, which is called 
 
6 The largest contract manufacturer at the time of this writing is Hon Hai Precision Industries (a.k.a. 
Foxconn, headquartered in Taiwan, but many of its factories are located in China). It ranked 60th in the 
Fortune Global 500 with sales of $95 billion in 2010 (Fortune, July 25, 2011). 
Section 1.6/Recent Developments in Manufacturing 
31 
 
 
reshoring. First, wage rates in China are increasing as the 
government attempts to evolve from an export-driven economy 
to a consumer-oriented economy, similar to the United States. 
Higher Chinese wage rates mean less advantage for U.S. 
compa- nies to offshore jobs to China. Second, logistics costs 
and delays involved in trans- porting products from China to North 
America are significant, especially as oil prices increase. 
Accordingly, some companies, in their analyses of costs and 
benefits, have decided to produce in the United States, re-
opening old factories or building new ones. On the other hand, 
U.S. companies producing goods for the Chinese market still have 
good reasons to keep their operations going in that country, just as 
Japanese and German automobile makers have established 
plants in the United States. 
 
Environmentally Conscious Manufacturing 
An inherent 
feature of virtually all manufacturing processes is waste (Section 
1.3.1). The most obvious examples are material removal 
processes, in which chips are removed from a starting 
workpiece to create the desired part geometry. Waste in one 
form or another is a by-product of nearly all production 
operations. Another unavoidable aspect of manufacturing is 
that power is required to accomplish any given process. 
Generating that power requires fossil fuels (at least in the 
United States and China), the burning of which results in 
pollution of the environment. At the end of the manufacturing 
sequence, a product is created that is sold to a customer. 
Ultimately, the product wears out and is disposed of, perhaps in 
some landfill, with the associated environmental degrada- tion. 
More and more attention is being paid by society to the 
environmental impact of human activities throughout the world 
and how modern civilization is using our natural resources at an 
unsustainable rate. Global warming is presently a major con- 
cern. The manufacturing industries contribute to these 
problems. 
Environmentally conscious manufacturing refers to programs 
that seek to deter- mine the most efficient use of materials and 
natural resources in production and minimize the negative 
consequences on the environment. Other terms for these pro- grams 
include green manufacturing and sustainable manufacturing. 
They all boil down to two basic approaches: (1) design products 
that minimize their environmen- tal impact and (2) design 
processes that are environmentally friendly. 
Product 
design 
is 
the 
logical 
starting 
point 
in 
environmentally conscious manu- facturing. The term design 
for environment (DFE) is used for the techniques that attempt 
to consider environmental impact during product design prior 
to produc- tion. Considerations in DFE include (1) selecting 
materials that require minimum energy to produce, (2) 
selecting processes that minimize waste of materials and 
energy, (3) designing parts that can be recycled or reused, (4) 
designing products that can be readily disassembled to recover 
the parts, (5) designing products that minimize the use of 
hazardous and toxic materials, and (6) giving attention to how 
Section 1.6/Recent Developments in Manufacturing 
32 
 
the product will be disposed of at the end of its useful life. 
To a great degree, decisions made during design dictate the 
materials and processes that are used to make the product. These 
decisions limit the options available to the manufacturing 
departments to achieve sustainability. However, various 
approaches can be applied to make plant operations more 
environmentally friendly. They include 
(1) adopting good housekeeping practices—keeping the factory 
clean, (2) preventing pollutants from escaping into the environment 
(rivers and atmosphere), (3) minimiz- ing waste of materials in 
unit operations, (4) recycling rather than discarding waste 
materials, (5) using net shape processes, (6) using renewable 
energy sources when feasible, (7) maintaining production 
equipment so that it operates at maximum effi- ciency, and (8) 
investing in equipment that minimizes power requirements. 
 
CCH 
1.1 What Is Manufacturing? Manufactur- 
ing? 
1.1 
What Is Manufacturing? Manu- 
facturing? 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
36 
The Nature of 
Materials 
 
 
 
 
An understanding of materials is fundamental in the 
study of manufacturing processes. In Chapter 1, manu- 
facturing was defined as a transformation process. It is 
the material that is transformed; and it is the behavior 
of the material when subjected to the particular forces, 
temperatures, and other physical parameters of the 
process that determines the success of the operation. 
Certain materials respond well to certain types of manu- 
facturing processes and poorly or not at all to others. 
What are the characteristics and properties of materials 
that determine their capacity to be transformed by the 
different processes? 
Part I of this book consists of four chapters that 
address this question. The current chapter considers the 
atomic structure of matter and the bonding bet- ween 
atoms and molecules. It also shows how atoms and 
molecules in engineering materials organize themselves 
into two structural forms: crystalline and noncrystalline. 
It turns out that the basic engineering materials—metals, 
ceramics, and polymers—can exist in either form, 
although a preference for a particular form is usually 
exhibited by a given material. For exam- ple, metals 
almost always exist as crystals in their solid state. Glass 
(e.g., window glass), a ceramic, assumes a noncrystalline 
form. Some polymers are mixtures of crystalline and 
amorphous structures. 
Chapters 3 and 4 discuss the mechanical and physical 
properties that are relevant in manufacturing. Of course, 
these properties are also important in product design. 
Chapter 5 is concerned with several part and product 
2 
 
2.1
Atomic Structure and the Elements 
2.2
Bonding between Atoms and Molecules 
2.3
Crystalline Structures 
2.3.1
 
2.3.2
 
2.3.3
 
2.3.4
 
2.4
Noncrystalline (Amorphous) Structures 
2.5
Engineering Materials 
36 
Section 2.1/Atomic Structure and the Elements 
37 
 
 
attributes that are specified during product design and must be achieved in manufac- turing: 
dimensions, tolerances, and surface finish. Chapter 5 also describes how these attributes 
are measured. 
 
Atomic Structure and the Elements 
The basic structural unit of matter is the atom. Each atom is composed of a positively 
charged nucleus, surrounded by a sufficient number of negatively charged electrons so that 
the charges are balanced. The number of electrons identifies the atomic number and 
the element of the atom. There are slightly more than 100 elements (not counting a few 
extras that have been artificially synthesized), and these elements are the chemi- cal 
building blocks of all matter. 
Just as there are differences among the elements, there are also similarities. The 
elements can be grouped into families and relationships established between and 
within the families by means of the Periodic Table, shown in Figure 2.1. In the 
horizontal direction there is a certain repetition, or periodicity, in the arrange- ment 
of elements. Metallic elements occupy the left and center portions of the chart, and 
nonmetals are located to the right. Between them, along a diagonal, is a transition 
zone containing elements called metalloids or semimetals. In principle, each of the 
elements can exist as a solid, liquid, or gas, depending on temperature and pressure. 
At room temperature and atmospheric pressure, they each have a natural phase; 
e.g., iron (Fe) is a solid, mercury (Hg) is a liquid, and nitrogen (N) is a gas. 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.1  Periodic Table of Elements. The atomic number and symbol are listed for the 103 elements. 
2. 
Section 2.1/Atomic Structure and the Elements 
38 
 
 
In the table, the elements are arranged into vertical columns and horizontal rows 
in such a way that similarities exist among elements in the same columns. For exam- 
ple, in the extreme right column are the noble gases (helium, neon, argon, krypton, 
xenon, and radon), all of which exhibit great chemical stability and low reaction 
rates. The halogens (fluorine, chlorine, bromine, iodine, and astatine) in column 
VIIA share similar properties (hydrogen is not included among the halogens). The 
noble metals (copper, silver, and gold) in column IB have similar properties. Gen- 
erally, there are correlations in properties among elements within a given column, 
whereas differences exist among elements in different columns. 
Many of the similarities and differences among the elements can be explained by their 
respective atomic structures. The simplest model of atomic structure, called the 
planetary model, shows the electrons of the atom orbiting around the nucleus at 
certain fixed distances, called shells, as shown in Figure 2.2. The hydrogen atom 
(atomic number 1) has one electron in the orbit closest to the nucleus. Helium 
(atomic number 2) has two. Also shown in the figure are the atomic structures 
for fluorine (atomic number 9), neon (atomic number 10), and sodium (atomic 
number 11). One might infer from these models that there is a maximum number 
of electrons that can be contained in a given orbit. This turns out to be correct, and 
the maximum is defined by 
Maximum number of electrons in an orbit = 2n2 
where n identifies the orbit, with n = 1 closest to the nucleus. 
The number of electrons in the outermost shell, relative to the maximum 
number allowed, determines to a large extent the atom’s chemical affinity for 
other atoms. These outer-shell electrons are called valence electrons. For exam- 
ple, because a hydrogen atom has only one electron in its single orbit, it readily 
combines with another hydrogen atom to form a hydrogen molecule H2. For the 
same reason, hydrogen also reacts readily with various other elements (e.g., to 
form H2O). In the helium atom, the two electrons in its only orbit are the maxi- 
mum allowed (2n2 = 2(1)2 = 2), and so helium is very stable. Neon is stable for 
the same reason: Its outermost orbit (n = 2) has eight electrons (the maximum 
allowed), so neon is an inert gas. 
In contrast to neon, fluorine has one fewer electron in its outer shell (n = 2) than 
the maximum allowed and is readily attracted to other elements that might share an 
 
 
FIGURE 2.2  Simple model of atomic structure for several elements: (a) hydrogen, (b) helium, (c) fluorine, (d) neon, 
and (e) sodium. 
Section 2.2/Bonding between Atoms and Molecules 
39 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.3 The sodium fluoride 
molecule formed by the transfer of the 
“extra” electron of the sodium atom 
to complete the outer orbit of the 
fluorine atom. 
 
electron to make a more stable set. The sodium atom seems divinely made for the 
situation, with one electron in its outermost orbit. It reacts strongly with fluorine to 
form the compound sodium fluoride, as pictured in Figure 2.3. 
At the low atomic numbers considered here, the prediction of the number of 
electrons in the outer orbit is straightforward. As the atomic number increases to 
higher levels, the allocation of electrons to the different orbits becomes somewhat 
more complicated. There are rules and guidelines, based on quantum mechanics, 
that can be used to predict the positions of the electrons among the various orbits 
and explain their characteristics. A discussion of these rules is somewhat beyond the scope 
of this coverage of manufacturing materials. 
 
Bonding between Atoms and Molecules 
Atoms are held together in molecules by various types of bonds that depend on the 
valence electrons. By comparison, molecules are attracted to each other by weaker 
bonds, which generally result from the electron configuration in the indi- vidual 
molecules. Thus, we have two types of bonding: (1) primary bonds, gener- ally 
associated with the formation of molecules; and (2) secondary bonds, generally associated 
with attraction between molecules. Primary bonds are much stronger than 
secondary bonds. 
 
Primary Bonds Primary bonds are characterized by strong atom-to-atom attrac- 
tions that involve the exchange of valence electrons. Primary bonds include the fol- 
lowing forms: (a) ionic, (b) covalent, and (c) metallic, as illustrated in Figure 2.4. 
Ionic and covalent bonds are called intramolecular bonds because they involve at- 
tractive forces between atoms within the molecule. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.4 Three 
forms of primary bonding: 
(a) ionic, (b) covalent, 
and (c) metallic. 
2.2 
Section 2.2/Bonding between Atoms and Molecules 
40 
 
 
In the ionic bond, the atoms of one element give up their outer electron(s), which 
are in turn attracted to the atoms of some other element to increase their electron count 
in the outermost shell to eight. In general, eight electrons in the outer shell is the most 
stable atomic configuration (except for the very light atoms), and nature pro- vides a 
very strong bond between atoms that achieves this configuration. The previous example 
of the reaction of sodium and fluorine to form sodium fluoride (Figure 2.3) illustrates 
this form of atomic bond. Sodium chloride (table salt) is a more common example. 
Because of the transfer of electrons between the atoms, sodium and fluorine (or sodium 
and chlorine) ions are formed, from which this bonding derives its name. Properties of 
solid materials with ionic bonding include low electrical conductivity and poor 
ductility. 
The covalent bond is one in which electrons are shared (as opposed to trans- 
ferred) between atoms in their outermost shells to achieve a stable set of eight. 
Fluorine and diamond are two examples of covalent bonds. In fluorine, one electron 
from each of two atoms is shared to form F2 gas, as shown in Figure 2.5(a). In the 
case of diamond, which is carbon (atomic number 6), each atom has four neighbors 
with which it shares electrons. This produces a very rigid three-dimensional struc- 
ture, not adequately represented in Figure 2.5(b), and accounts for the extreme high 
hardness of this material. Other forms of carbon (e.g., graphite) do not exhibit this 
rigid atomic structure. Solids with covalent bonding generally possess high hardness 
and low electrical conductivity. 
The metallic bond is, of course, the atomic bonding mechanism in pure metals 
and metal alloys. Atoms of the metallic elements generally possess too few elec- 
trons in their outermost orbits to complete the outer shells for all of the atoms in, 
say, a given block of metal. Accordingly, instead of sharing on an atom-to-atom 
basis, metallic bonding involves the sharing of outer-shell electrons by all atoms 
to form a general electron cloud that permeates the entire block. This cloud pro- 
vides the attractive forces to hold the atoms together and form a strong, rigid 
structure in most cases. Because of the general sharing of electrons, and their 
freedom to move within the metal, metallic bonding provides for good electri- cal 
conductivity. Other typical properties of materials characterized by metallic 
bonding include good conduction of heat and good ductility. (Although some of 
these terms are yet to be defined, the reader’s general understanding of material 
properties is assumed.) 
 
Secondary Bonds Whereas primary bonds involve atom-to-atom attractive forces, 
secondary bonds involve attraction forces between molecules, or intermolecular forces. 
There is no transfer or sharing of electrons in secondary bonding, and these bonds are 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.5 Two examples 
of covalent bonding: 
(a) fluorine gas F2, and 
(b) diamond. 
Section 2.3/Crystalline Structures 
41 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.6  Three types of secondary bonding: (a) dipole forces, (b) London forces, and (c) hydrogen bonding. 
 
 
therefore weaker than primary bonds. There are three forms of secondary bonding: 
(a) dipole forces, (b) London forces, and (c) hydrogen bonding, illustrated in Figure 2.6. 
Types (a) and (b) are often referred to as van der Waals forces, after the scientist who 
first studied and quantified them. 
Dipole forces arise in a molecule comprised of two atoms that have equal and 
opposite electrical charges. Each molecule therefore forms a dipole, as shown in 
Figure 2.6(a) for hydrogen chloride. Although the material is electrically neu- tral 
in its aggregate form, on a molecular scale the individual dipoles attract each 
other, given the proper orientation of positive and negative ends of the molecules. 
These dipole forces provide a net intermolecular bonding within the material. 
London forces involve attractive forces between nonpolar molecules; that is, the 
atoms in the molecule do not form dipoles in the sense of the preceding paragraph. 
However, owing to the rapid motion of the electrons in orbit around the molecule, 
temporary dipoles form when more electrons happen to be on one side of the mole- 
cule than the other, as suggested by Figure 2.6(b). These instantaneous dipoles pro- 
vide a force of attraction between molecules in the material. 
Finally, hydrogen bonding occurs in molecules containing hydrogen atoms that are 
covalently bonded to another atom (e.g., oxygen in H2O). Because the elec- trons 
needed to complete the shell of the hydrogen atom are aligned on one side of 
its nucleus, the opposite side has a net positive charge that attracts the electrons of 
atoms in neighboring molecules. Hydrogen bonding is illustrated in Figure 
2.6(c) for water, and is generally a stronger intermolecular bonding mechanism 
than the other two forms of secondary bonding. It is important in the formation of 
many polymers. 
 
Crystalline Structures 
Atoms and molecules are used as building blocks for the more macroscopic struc- ture 
of matter that is considered here and in the following section. When materials solidify 
from the molten state, they tend to close ranks and pack tightly, in many cases 
arranging themselves into a very orderly structure, and in other cases, not quite so 
orderly. Two fundamentally different material structures can be distin- guished: (1) 
crystalline and (2) noncrystalline. Crystalline structures are examined in this section, 
and noncrystalline in the next. 
Many materials form into crystals on solidification from the molten or liquid state. 
It is characteristic of virtually all metals, as well as many ceramics and polymers. A 
crystalline structure is one in which the atoms are located at regular and recurring 
positions in three dimensions. The pattern may be replicated millions of times within 
2.3 
Section 2.3/Crystalline Structures 
42 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.7 Body-centered cubic (BCC) crystal structure: (a) unit cell with atoms 
indicated as point locations in a three-dimensional axis system; (b) unit cell model 
showing closely packed atoms (sometimes called the hard-ball model); and 
(c) repeated pattern of the BCC structure. 
 
a given crystal. The structure can be viewed in the form of a unit cell, which is the 
basic geometric grouping of atoms that is repeated. To illustrate, consider the unit 
cell for the body-centered cubic (BCC) crystal structure shown in Figure 2.7, one of 
the common structures found in metals. The simplest model of the BCC unit cell is 
illustrated in Figure 2.7(a). Although this model clearly depicts the locations of the 
atoms within the cell, it does not indicate the close packing of the atoms that occurs 
in the real crystal, as in Figure 2.7(b). Figure 2.7(c) shows the repeating nature of the unit 
cell within the crystal. 
 
 
2.3.1 TYPES OF CRYSTAL STRUCTURES 
 
In metals, three lattice structures are common: (1) body-centered cubic (BCC), 
(2) face-centered cubic (FCC), and (3) hexagonal close-packed (HCP), illustrated 
in Figure 2.8. Crystal structures for the common metals are presented in Table 2.1. 
It should be noted that some metals undergo a change of structure at different 
temperatures. Iron, for example, is BCC at room temperature; it changes to FCC 
above 912°C (1674°F) and back to BCC at temperatures above 1400°C (2550°F). 
When a metal (or other material) changes structure like this, it is referred to as 
being allotropic. 
 
 
FIGURE 2.8 Three types of crystal structures in metals: (a) body-centered cubic, (b) face-centered 
cubic, and (c) hexagonal close-packed. 
Section 2.3/Crystalline Structures 
43 
 
 
 TABLE • 2.1 Crystal structures for the common metals (at room temperature). 
 
Body-Centered Cubic 
Face-Centered Cubic 
Hexagonal Close-Packed 
(BCC) 
 
(FCC) 
 
(HCP) 
Chromium (Cr) 
Aluminum (Al) 
Magnesium (Mg) 
Iron (Fe) 
Copper (Cu) 
Titanium (Ti) 
Molybdenum (Mo) 
Gold (Au) 
Zinc (Zn) 
Tantalum (Ta) 
Lead (Pb) 
Tungsten (W) 
Silver (Ag) 
Nickel (Ni) 
 
 
2.3.2 IMPERFECTIONS IN CRYSTALS 
 
Thus far, crystal structures have been discussed as if they were perfect—the unit cell 
repeated in the material over and over in all directions. A perfect crystal is sometimes 
desirable to satisfy aesthetic or engineering purposes. For instance, a perfect dia- mond 
(contains no flaws) is more valuable than one containing imperfections. In the 
production of integrated circuit chips, large single crystals of silicon possess desirable 
processing characteristics for forming the microscopic details of the circuit pattern. 
However, there are various reasons why a crystal’s lattice structure may not 
be perfect. The imperfections often arise naturally because of the inability of the 
solidifying material to continue the replication of the unit cell indefinitely without 
interruption. Grain boundaries in metals are an example. In other cases, the imper- 
fections are introduced purposely during the manufacturing process, for example, 
the addition of an alloying ingredient in a metal to increase its strength. 
The various imperfections in crystalline solids are also called defects. Either term, 
imperfection or defect, refers to deviations in the regular pattern of the crystalline 
lattice structure. They can be catalogued as (1) point defects, (2) line defects, and 
(3) surface defects. 
Point defects are imperfections in the crystal structure involving either a single 
atom or a few atoms. The defects can take various forms including, as shown in 
Figure 2.9: (a) vacancy, the simplest defect, involving a missing atom within the 
lattice structure; (b) ion-pair vacancy, also called a Schottky defect, which involves 
 
 
FIGURE 2.9  Point defects: (a) vacancy, (b) ion-pair vacancy, (c) interstitialcy, and (d) displaced ion. 
Section 2.3/Crystalline Structures 
44 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.10 Line 
defects: (a) edge 
dislocation and 
(b) screw dislocation. 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
 
a missing pair of ions of opposite charge in a compound that has an overall charge 
balance; (c) interstitialcy, a lattice distortion produced by the presence of an extra 
atom in the structure; and (d) displaced ion, known as a Frenkel defect, which oc- 
curs when an ion becomes removed from a regular position in the lattice structure 
and inserted into an interstitial position not normally occupied by such an ion. 
A line defect is a connected group of point defects that forms a line in the lat- 
tice structure. The most important line defect is the dislocation, which can take two 
forms: (a) edge dislocation and (b) screw dislocation. An edge dislocation is the edge 
of an extra plane of atoms that exists in the lattice, as illustrated in Figure 2.10(a). 
A screw dislocation, Figure 2.10(b), is a spiral within the lattice structure wrapped 
around an imperfection line, like a screw is wrapped around its axis. Both types of 
dislocations can arise in the crystal structure during solidification (e.g., casting), or 
they can be initiated during a deformation process (e.g., metal forming) performed 
on the solid material. Dislocations are useful in explaining certain aspects of me- 
chanical behavior in metals. 
Surface defects are imperfections that extend in two directions to form a boundary. The 
most obvious example is the external surface of a crystalline object that defines its 
shape. The surface is an interruption in the lattice structure. Surface boundaries can 
also lie inside the material. Grain boundaries are the best example of these in- ternal 
surface interruptions. Metallic grains are discussed in a moment, but first let 
consider how deformation occurs in a crystal lattice, and how the process is aided by 
the presence of dislocations. 
 
 
2.3.3 DEFORMATION IN METALLIC CRYSTALS 
 
When a crystal is subjected to a gradually increasing mechanical stress, its initial 
response is to deform elastically. This can be likened to a tilting of the lattice struc- 
ture without any changes of position among the atoms in the lattice, in the manner 
depicted in Figure 2.11(a) and (b). If the force is removed, the lattice structure (and 
therefore the crystal) returns to its original shape. If the stress reaches a high value 
relative to the electrostatic forces holding the atoms in their lattice positions, a per- 
manent shape change occurs, called plastic deformation. What has happened is that 
the atoms in the lattice have permanently moved from their previous locations, and 
a new equilibrium lattice has been formed, as suggested by Figure 2.11(c). 
Section 2.3/Crystalline Structures 
45 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.11 Deformation of a crystal structure: (a) original lattice; (b) elastic deformation, 
with no permanent change in positions of atoms; and (c) plastic deformation, in which atoms 
in the lattice are forced to move to new “homes.” 
 
The lattice deformation shown in (c) of the figure is one possible mechanism, called 
slip, by which plastic deformation can occur in a crystalline structure. The other is 
called twinning, discussed later. 
Slip involves the relative movement of atoms on opposite sides of a plane in the 
lattice, called the slip plane. The slip plane must be somehow aligned with the lattice 
structure (as indicated in the sketch), and so there are certain preferred directions 
along which slip is more likely to occur. The number of these slip directions de- 
pends on the lattice type. The three common metal crystal structures are somewhat 
more complicated, especially in three dimensions, than the square lattice depicted in Figure 
2.11. It turns out that HCP has the fewest slip directions, BCC the most, and FCC 
falls in between. HCP metals show poor ductility and are generally difficult to 
deform at room temperature. Metals with BCC structure would figure to have the 
highest ductility, if the number of slip directions were the only criterion. However, 
nature is not so simple. These metals are generally stronger than the others, which 
complicates the issue, and the BCC metals usually require higher stresses to cause 
slip. In fact, some of the BCC metals exhibit poor ductility. Low carbon steel is a 
notable exception; although relatively strong, it is widely used with great commer- 
cial success in sheet-metal-forming operations, where it exhibits good ductility. The 
FCC metals are generally the most ductile of the three crystal structures, combining 
a good number of slip directions with (usually) relatively low to moderate strength. 
All three of these metal structures become more ductile at elevated temperatures, 
and this fact is often exploited in shaping them. 
Dislocations play an important role in facilitating slip in metals. When a lattice 
structure containing an edge dislocation is subjected to a shear stress, the material 
deforms much more readily than in a perfect structure. This is explained by the fact 
that the dislocation is put into motion within the crystal lattice in the presence of the 
stress, as shown in the series of sketches in Figure 2.12. Why is it easier to move a dis- 
location through the lattice than it is to deform the lattice itself? The answer is that 
the atoms at the edge dislocation require a smaller displacement within the distorted lattice 
structure to reach a new equilibrium position. Thus, a lower energy level is needed 
to realign the atoms into the new positions than if the lattice were missing the 
dislocation. A lower stress level is therefore required to effect the deformation. 
Because the new position manifests a similar distorted lattice, movement of atoms 
at the dislocation continues at the lower stress level. 
The slip phenomenon and the influence of dislocations have been explained here 
on a very microscopic basis. On a larger scale, slip occurs many times over 
Section 2.3/Crystalline Structures 
46 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.12  Effect of dislocations in the lattice structure under stress. In the series of diagrams, the 
movement of the dislocation allows deformation to occur under a lower stress than in a perfect lattice. 
 
 
throughout the metal when subjected to a deforming load, thus causing it to ex- 
hibit the familiar macroscopic behavior of stretching, compressing, or bending. 
Dislocations represent a good-news–bad-news situation. Because of dislocations, 
the metal is more ductile and yields more readily to plastic deformation (forming) 
during manufacturing. However, from a product design viewpoint, the metal is not 
nearly as strong as it would be in the absence of dislocations. 
Twinning is a second way in which metal crystals plastically deform. Twinning 
can be defined as a mechanism of plastic deformation in which atoms on one side of 
a plane (called the twinning plane) are shifted to form a mirror image of the other 
side of the plane. It is illustrated in Figure 2.13. The mechanism is important in HCP metals 
(e.g., magnesium, zinc) because they do not slip readily. Besides structure, another 
factor in twinning is the rate of deformation. The slip mechanism requires more 
time than twinning, which can occur almost instantaneously. Thus, when the 
deformation rate is very high, metals twin that would otherwise slip. Low carbon 
steel is an example that illustrates this rate sensitivity; when subjected to high strain 
rates it twins, whereas at moderate rates it deforms by slip. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.13 Twinning 
involves the formation 
of an atomic mirror 
image (i.e., a “twin”) 
on the opposite side 
of the twinning plane: 
(a) before and (b) after 
twinning. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
Section 2.4/Noncrystalline (Amorphous) Structures 
47 
 
 
2.3.4 GRAINS AND GRAIN BOUNDARIES IN METALS 
 
A given block of metal may contain millions of individual crystals, called grains. 
Each grain has its own unique lattice orientation; but collectively, the grains are ran- 
domly oriented within the block. Such a structure is referred to as polycrystalline. It 
is easy to understand how such a structure is the natural state of the material. When 
the block is cooled from the molten state and begins to solidify, nucleation of indi- 
vidual crystals occurs at random positions and orientations throughout the liquid. As 
these crystals grow they finally interfere with each other, forming at their interface a 
surface defect—a grain boundary. The grain boundary consists of a transition zone, 
perhaps only a few atoms thick, in which the atoms are not aligned with either grain. 
The size of the grains in the metal block is determined by the number of nucleation 
sites in the molten material and the cooling rate of the mass, among other factors. In 
a casting process, the nucleation sites are often created by the relatively cold walls 
of the mold, which motivates a somewhat preferred grain orientation at these walls. 
Grain size is inversely related to cooling rate: Faster cooling promotes smaller 
grain size, whereas slower cooling has the opposite effect. Grain size is important 
in metals because it affects mechanical properties. Smaller grain size is generally 
preferable from a design viewpoint because it means higher strength and hard- 
ness. It is also desirable in certain manufacturing operations (e.g., metal forming), 
because it means higher ductility during deformation and a better surface on the 
finished product. 
Another factor influencing mechanical properties is the presence of grain 
boundaries in the metal. They represent imperfections in the crystalline structure 
that interrupt the continued movement of dislocations. This helps to explain why 
smaller grain size—therefore more grains and more grain boundaries—increases the 
strength of the metal. By interfering with dislocation movement, grain boundaries 
also contribute to the characteristic property of a metal to become stronger as it is 
deformed. The property is called strain hardening, and it is examined more closely 
in Chapter 3 on mechanical properties. 
 
Noncrystalline (Amorphous) Structures 
Many important materials are noncrystalline—liquids and gases, for example. Water 
and air have noncrystalline structures. A metal loses its crystalline structure when 
it is melted. Mercury is a liquid metal at room temperature, with its melting point 
of -38°C (-37°F). Important classes of engineering materials have a noncrystalline 
form in their solid state; the term amorphous is often used to describe these materi- 
als. Glass, many plastics, and rubber fall into this category. Many important plastics 
are mixtures of crystalline and noncrystalline forms. Even metals can be amorphous rather 
than crystalline, given that the cooling rate during transformation from liquid to solid 
is fast enough to inhibit the atoms from arranging themselves into their pre- ferred 
regular patterns. This can happen, for instance, if the molten metal is poured 
between cold, closely spaced, rotating rolls. 
Two closely related features distinguish noncrystalline from crystalline materials: 
(1) absence of a long-range order in the molecular structure, and (2) differences in 
melting and thermal expansion characteristics. 
The difference in molecular structure can be visualized with reference to Fig- 
ure 2.14. The closely packed and repeating pattern of the crystal structure is shown 
on the left; and the less dense and random arrangement of atoms in the noncrystalline 
2.4 
Section 2.4/Noncrystalline (Amorphous) Structures 
48 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.14 Illustration of difference 
in structure between: (a) crystalline 
and (b) noncrystalline materials. The 
crystal structure is regular, repeating, 
and denser, while the noncrystalline 
structure is more loosely packed and 
random. 
 
 
material on the right. The difference is demonstrated by a metal when it melts. The 
more loosely packed atoms in the molten metal show an increase in volume (reduction 
in density) compared with the material’s solid crystalline state. This effect is character- 
istic of most materials when melted (ice is a notable exception; liquid water is denser 
than solid ice). It is a general characteristic of liquids and solid amorphous materials 
that they are absent of long-range order as on the right in our figure. 
The melting phenomenon will now be examined in more detail, and in doing so, 
the second important difference between crystalline and noncrystalline structures is 
illustrated. As indicated above, a metal experiences an increase in volume when it 
melts from the solid to the liquid state. For a pure metal, this volumetric change occurs 
rather abruptly, at a constant temperature (i.e., the melting temperature Tm), as indi- 
cated in Figure 2.15. The change represents a discontinuity from the slopes on either 
side in the plot. The gradual slopes characterize the metal’s thermal expansion—the 
change in volume as a function of temperature, which is usually different in the solid 
and liquid states. Associated with the sudden volume increase as the metal transforms from 
solid to liquid at the melting point is the addition of a certain quantity of heat, called 
the heat of fusion, which causes the atoms to lose the dense, regular arrange- ment 
of the crystalline structure. The process is reversible; it operates in both direc- tions. 
If the molten metal is cooled through its melting temperature, the same abrupt change 
in volume occurs (except that it is a decrease), and the same quantity of heat is given 
off by the metal. 
An amorphous material exhibits quite different behavior than that of a pure 
metal when it changes from solid to liquid, as shown in Figure 2.15. The process 
is again reversible, but observe the behavior of the amorphous material during 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 2.15 Characteristic change in 
volume for a pure metal (a crystalline 
structure), compared to the same 
volumetric changes in glass 
(a noncrystalline structure). 
Section 2.5/Engineering Materials 
49 
 
 
cooling from the liquid state, rather than during melting from the solid, as before. 
Glass (silica, SiO2) is used to illustrate. At high temperatures, glass is a true liquid, 
and the molecules are free to move about as in the usual definition of a liquid. As 
the glass cools, it gradually transforms into the solid state, going through a transi- 
tion phase, called a supercooled liquid, before finally becoming rigid. It does not 
show the sudden volumetric change that is characteristic of crystalline materials; 
instead it passes through its melting temperature Tm without a change in its thermal 
expansion slope. In this supercooled liquid region, the material becomes increas- 
ingly viscous as the temperature continues to decrease. As it cools further, a point 
is finally reached at which the supercooled liquid converts to a solid. This is called 
the glass-transition temperature Tg. At this point, there is a change in the thermal 
expansion slope. (It might be more precise to refer to it as the thermal contraction 
slope; however, the slope is the same for expansion and contraction). The rate of 
thermal expansion is lower for the solid material than for the supercooled liquid. 
The difference in behavior between crystalline and noncrystalline materials can 
be traced to the response of their respective atomic structures to changes in temper- 
ature. When a pure metal solidifies from the molten state, the atoms arrange them- 
selves into a regular and recurring structure. This crystal structure is much more 
compact than the random and loosely packed liquid from which it formed. Thus, 
the process of solidification produces the abrupt volumetric contraction observed 
in Figure 2.15 for the crystalline material. By contrast, amorphous materials do not 
achieve this repeating and closely packed structure at low temperatures. The atomic 
structure is the same random arrangement as in the liquid state; thus, there is no 
abrupt volumetric change as these materials transition from liquid to solid. 
 
Engineering Materials 
This section summarizes how atomic structure, bonding, and crystal structure (or 
absence thereof) are related to the type of engineering material: metals, ceramics, 
and polymers. 
 
Metals Metals have crystalline structures in the solid state, almost without excep- 
tion. The unit cells of these crystal structures are almost always BCC, FCC, or HCP. 
The atoms of the metals are held together by metallic bonding, which means that 
their valence electrons can move about with relative freedom (compared with the 
other types of atomic and molecular bonding). These structures and bonding gener- 
ally make the metals strong and hard. Many of the metals are quite ductile (capable of being 
deformed, which is useful in manufacturing), especially the FCC metals. Other general 
properties of metals related to structure and bonding include high electri- cal and 
thermal conductivity, opaqueness (impervious to light rays), and reflectivity 
(capacity to reflect light rays). 
 
Ceramics Ceramic molecules are characterized by ionic or covalent bonding, or 
both. The metallic atoms release or share their outermost electrons to the nonme- 
tallic atoms, and a strong attractive force exists within the molecules. The general 
properties that result from these bonding mechanisms include high hardness and 
stiffness (even at elevated temperatures) and brittleness (no ductility). The bond- 
ing also means that ceramics are electrically insulating (nonconducting), refractory 
(thermally resistant), and chemically inert. 
2.5 
Section 1.6/Recent Developments in Manufacturing 
50 
 
 
Ceramics possess either a crystalline or noncrystalline 
structure. Most ceramics have a crystal structure, whereas glasses 
based on silica (SiO2) are amorphous. In certain cases, either 
structure can exist in the same ceramic material. For example, 
silica occurs in nature as crystalline quartz. When this mineral is 
melted and then cooled, it solidifies to form fused silica, which 
has a noncrystalline structure. 
 
Polymers A polymer molecule consists of many repeating 
mers to form very large molecules held together by covalent 
bonding. Elements in polymers are usu- ally carbon plus one or 
more other elements such as hydrogen, nitrogen, oxygen, and 
chlorine. Secondary bonding (van der Waals) holds the 
molecules 
together 
within 
the 
aggregate 
material 
(intermolecular bonding). Polymers have either a glassy 
structure or mixture of glassy and crystalline. There are 
differences among the three polymer types. In thermoplastic 
polymers, the molecules consist of long chains of mers in a 
linear structure. These materials can be heated and cooled 
without substantially altering their linear structure. In 
thermosetting polymers, the molecules transform into a rigid, 
three-dimensional structure on cooling from a heated plastic 
condition. If thermosetting polymers are reheated, they 
degrade chemically rather than soften. Elastomers have large 
molecules with coiled struc- tures. The uncoiling and recoiling 
of the molecules when subjected to stress cycles motivate the 
aggregate material to exhibit its characteristic elastic behavior. 
The molecular structure and bonding of polymers provide them 
with the fol- lowing typical properties: low density, high 
electrical resistivity (some polymers are used as insulating 
materials), and low thermal conductivity. Strength and stiff- ness 
of polymers vary widely. Some are strong and rigid (although 
not matching the strength and stiffness of metals or ceramics), 
whereas others exhibit highly elastic behavior. 
 
Physical 
Properties 
of Materials 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Contents 
4.1 Volumetric and Melting Properties 
4.1.1 Density 
4.1.2 Thermal Expansion 
4.1.3 Melting Characteristics 
4.2 Thermal Properties 
4.2.1 Specific Heat and Thermal 
Conductivity 
4.2.2 Thermal Properties in 
Manufacturing 
4.3 Mass Diffusion 
4.4 Electrical Properties 
4.4.1 Resistivity and Conductivity 
4.4.2 Classes of Materials by Electrical 
Properties 
4.5 Electrochemical Processes 
Physical properties, as the term is used here, defines 
the behavior of materials in response to physical forces 
other than mechanical. They include volumetric, ther- 
mal, electrical, and electrochemical properties. Compo- 
nents in a product must do more than simply withstand 
mechanical stresses. They must conduct electricity (or 
prevent its conduction), allow heat to be transferred (or 
allow it to escape), transmit light (or block its transmis- 
sion), and satisfy myriad other functions. 
Physical properties are important in manufacturing 
because they often influence the performance of the 
process. For example, thermal properties of the work 
material in machining determine the cutting tempera- 
ture, which affects how long the tool can be used be- 
fore it fails. In microelectronics, electrical properties 
of silicon and the way in which these properties can be 
altered by various chemical and physical processes com- 
prise the basis of semiconductor manufacturing. 
This chapter covers the physical properties that are 
most important in manufacturing—properties that are 
encountered in subsequent chapters of the book. They 
are divided into major categories such as volumetric, 
thermal, electrical, and so on. Also, as in the previous 
chapter on mechanical properties, the importance of 
these properties in manufacturing is discussed. 
 
4.1 Volumetric and 
Melting Properties 
These properties are related to the volume of solids and 
how they are affected by temperature. The prop- erties 
include density, thermal expansion, and melting point. 
They are explained in the following, and typical values 
for selected engineering materials are presented in 
Table 4.1. 
4 
83 
Section 4.1/Volumetric and Melting Properties 
85 
 
 
 
TABLE • 4.1 Volumetric properties in U.S. customary units for selected engineering materials. 
 
 
 
Material 
 
Density, r 
g/cm3 
lb/in3 
Coefficient of Thermal 
Expansion, a 
8C21 3 1026 8F21 3 1026 
 
Melting Point, Tm 
8C 
8F 
Metals 
 
 
 
Aluminum 
2.70 
0.098 
24 
13.3 
660 
1220 
Copper 
8.97 
0.324 
17 
9.4 
1083 
1981 
Iron 
7.87 
0.284 
12.1 
6.7 
1539 
2802 
Lead 
11.35 
0.410 
29 
16.1 
327 
621 
Magnesium 
1.74 
0.063 
26 
14.4 
650 
1202 
Nickel 
8.92 
0.322 
13.3 
7.4 
1455 
2651 
Steel 
7.87 
0.284 
12 
6.7 
a 
a 
Tin 
7.31 
0.264 
23 
12.7 
232 
449 
Titanium 
4.51 
0.163 
8.6 
4.7 
1668 
3034 
Tungsten 
19.30 
0.697 
4.0 
2.2 
3410 
6170 
Zinc 
7.15 
0.258 
40 
22.2 
420 
787 
Ceramics and Silicon 
 
 
 
Glass 
2.5 
0.090 
1.8–9.0 
1.0–5.0 
b 
b 
Alumina 
3.8 
0.137 
9.0 
5.0 
NA 
NA 
Silica 
2.66 
0.096 
NA 
NA 
b 
b 
Silicon 
2.33 
0.085 
2.6 
1.4 
1414 
2577 
Polymers 
 
 
 
Phenol resins 
1.3 
0.047 
60 
33 
c 
c 
Nylon 
1.16 
0.042 
100 
55 
b 
b 
Teflon 
2.2 
0.079 
100 
55 
b 
b 
Natural rubber 
1.2 
0.043 
80 
45 
b 
b 
Polyethylene (low density) 
0.92 
0.033 
180 
100 
b 
b 
Polystyrene 
1.05 
0.038 
60 
33 
b 
b 
 
Compiled from, [2], [3], [4], and other sources. 
aMelting characteristics of steel depend on composition. 
bSoftens at elevated temperatures and does not have a well-defined melting point. 
cChemically degrades at high temperatures. NA = not available; value of property for this material could not be obtained. 
 
4.1.1 DENSITY 
 
In engineering, the density of a material is its weight per unit volume. Its symbol is 
r, and typical units are g/cm3 (lb/in3). The density of an element is determined by 
its atomic number and other factors such as atomic radius and atomic packing. The 
term specific gravity expresses the density of a material relative to the density of 
water and is therefore a ratio with no units. 
Density is an important consideration in the selection of a material for a given 
application, but it is generally not the only property of interest. Strength is also 
important, and the two properties are often related in a strength-to-weight ratio, 
which is the tensile strength of the material divided by its density. The ratio is useful 
in comparing materials for structural applications in aircraft, automobiles, and other 
products in which weight and energy are of concern. 
 
4.1.2 THERMAL EXPANSION 
 
The density of a material is a function of temperature. The general relationship is 
that density decreases with increasing temperature. Put another way, the volume per 
Section 4.1/Volumetric and Melting Properties 
85 
 
 
unit weight increases with temperature. Thermal expansion is the name given to this effect 
that temperature has on density. It is usually expressed as the coefficient of thermal 
expansion, which measures the change in length per degree of temperature, as 
mm/mm/°C (in/in/°F). It is a length ratio rather than a volume ratio because this is easier 
to measure and apply. It is consistent with the usual design situation in which 
dimensional changes are of greater interest than volumetric changes. The change in 
length corresponding to a given temperature change is given by: 
 
L2 - L1 = aL1 (T2 - T1) 
(4.1) 
 
where a = coefficient of thermal expansion, °C-1(°F-1); and L1 and L2 are lengths, 
mm (in), corresponding, respectively, to temperatures T1 and T2, °C (°F). 
Values of coefficient of thermal expansion given in Table 4.1 suggest that it has 
a linear relationship with temperature. This is only an approximation. Not only is 
length affected by temperature, but the thermal expansion coefficient itself is also 
affected. For some materials it increases with temperature; for other materials it 
decreases. These changes are usually not significant enough to be of much concern, 
and values like those in the table are quite useful in design calculations for the range 
of temperatures contemplated in service. Changes in the coefficient are more sub- 
stantial when the metal undergoes a phase transformation, such as from solid to 
liquid, or from one crystal structure to another. 
In manufacturing operations, thermal expansion is put to good use in shrink fit 
and expansion fit assemblies (Section 31.3), in which a part is heated to increase its 
size or cooled to decrease its size to permit insertion into some other part. When the 
part returns to ambient temperature, a tightly fitted assembly is obtained. Thermal 
expansion can be a problem in heat treatment (Chapter 26) and welding (Section 
29.6) because of thermal stresses that develop in the material during these processes. 
 
 
4.1.3 MELTING CHARACTERISTICS 
 
For a pure element, the melting point Tm is the temperature at which the mate- rial 
transforms from solid to liquid state. The reverse transformation, from liquid to solid, 
occurs at the same temperature and is called the freezing point. For crystalline elements, 
such as metals, the melting and freezing temperatures are the same. A cer- tain 
amount of heat energy, called the heat of fusion, is required at this temperature to 
accomplish the transformation from solid to liquid. 
Melting of a metal element at a specific temperature assumes equilibrium condi- 
tions. Exceptions occur in nature; for example, when a molten metal is cooled, it may 
remain in the liquid state below its freezing point if nucleation of crystals does not 
initiate immediately. When this happens, the liquid is said to be supercooled. 
There are other variations in the melting process—differences in the way melt- 
ing occurs in different materials. For example, unlike pure metals, most metal alloys 
do not have a single melting point. Instead, melting begins at a certain temperature, 
the temperature increases until finally convert- 
ing completely to the liquid state at a temperature called the liquidus. Between the 
two temperatures, the alloy is a mixture of solid and molten metals, the amounts of 
each being inversely proportional to their relative distances from the liquidus and 
solidus. Although most alloys behave in this way, exceptions are eutectic alloys that 
 
 
called the solidus, and continues as 
Section 4.1/Volumetric and Melting Properties 
85 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 4.1 Changes 
in volume per unit 
weight (1/density) as a 
function of temperature 
for a hypothetical pure 
metal, alloy, and glass; 
all exhibiting similar 
thermal expansion and 
melting characteristics. 
 
 
 
melt (and freeze) at a single temperature. These issues are examined in the discus- 
sion of phase diagrams in Chapter 6. 
Another difference in melting occurs with noncrystalline materials (glasses). In 
these materials, there is a gradual transition from solid to liquid states. The solid 
material gradually softens as temperature increases, finally becoming liquid at the 
melting point. During softening, the material has a consistency of increasing plasticity 
(increasingly like a fluid) as it gets closer to the melting point. 
These differences in melting characteristics among pure metals, alloys, and glass 
are portrayed in Figure 4.1. The plots show changes in density as a function of tem- 
perature for three hypothetical materials: a pure metal, an alloy, and glass. Plotted in 
the figure is the volumetric change, which is the reciprocal of density. 
The importance of melting in manufacturing is obvious. In metal casting 
(Chapters 10 and 11), the metal is melted and then poured into a mold cavity. Metals with 
lower melting points are generally easier to cast, but if the melting temperature is too 
low, the metal loses its applicability as an engineering material. Melting char- 
acteristics of polymers are important in plastic molding and other polymer shaping 
processes (Chapter 13). Sintering of powdered metals and ceramics requires knowl- 
edge of melting points. Sintering does not melt the materials, but the temperatures 
used in the process must approach the melting point to achieve the required bond- 
ing of the powders (Chapters 15 and 16). 
 
Thermal Properties 
Much of the previous section is concerned with the effects of temperature on volu- 
metric properties of materials. Certainly, thermal expansion, melting, and heat of 
fusion are thermal properties because temperature determines the thermal energy 
level of the atoms, leading to the changes in the materials. The current section ex- 
amines several additional thermal properties—ones that relate to the storage and 
flow of heat within a substance. The usual properties of interest are specific heat 
4.2 
Section 4.2/Thermal Properties 
87 
 
 
and these values change for different temperatures. 
Specific Heat 
Thermal Conductivity 
Specific Heat  Thermal Conductivity 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Material 
Cal/g °Ca or 
Btu/lbm °F 
 
J/s mm 
°C 
 
Btu/hr in °F 
 
Material 
Cal/g °Ca or 
Btu/lbm °F 
 
J/s mm 
°C 
 
Btu/hr in °F 
Metals 
 
  
 
Ceramics 
 
  
 
Aluminum 
0.21 
 
0.22 
9.75 
Alumina 
0.18 
 
0.029 
1.4 
Cast iron 
0.11 
 
0.06 
2.7 
Concrete 
0.2 
 
0.012 
0.6 
Copper 
0.092 
 
0.40 
18.7 
Polymers 
 
 
 
 
Iron 
0.11 
 
0.072 
2.98 
Phenolics 
0.4 
 
0.00016 
0.0077 
Lead 
0.031 
 
0.033 
1.68 
Polyethylene 
0.5 
 
0.00034 
0.016 
Magnesium 
0.25 
 
0.16 
7.58 
Teflon 
0.25 
 
0.00020 
0.0096 
Nickel 
0.105 
 
0.070 
2.88 
Natural rubber 
0.48 
 
0.00012 
0.006 
Steel 
0.11 
 
0.046 
2.20 
Other 
 
 
 
 
Stainless steelb 
0.11 
 
0.014 
0.67 
Silicon 
0.17 
 
0.149 
6.6 
Tin 
0.054 
 
0.062 
3.0 
Water (liquid) 
1.00 
 
0.0006 
0.029 
Zinc 
0.091 
 
0.112 
5.41 
Ice 
0.46 
 
0.0023 
0.11 
 
Compiled from [2], [3], [6], and other sources. 
aSpecific heat has the same numerical value in Btu/lbm-F or Cal/g-C. 1.0 Calorie = 4.186 Joule. 
bAustenitic (18-8) stainless steel. 
 
 
 
and thermal conductivity, values of which are compiled for selected materials in Table 
4.2. 
 
 
4.2.1 SPECIFIC HEAT AND THERMAL CONDUCTIVITY 
 
The specific heat C of a material is defined as the quantity of heat energy required to 
increase the temperature of a unit mass of the material by one degree. Some typical 
values are listed in Table 4.2. To determine the amount of energy needed to heat a 
certain weight of a metal in a furnace to a given elevated temperature, the following 
equation can be used: 
 
H = C W (T2 - T1) 
(4.2) 
 
where H = amount of heat energy, J (Btu); C = specific heat of the material, J/kg °C 
(Btu/lb °F); W = its weight, kg (lb); and (T2 - T1) = change in temperature, °C (°F). 
The volumetric heat storage capacity of a material is often of interest. This is sim- 
ply density multiplied by specific heat rC. Thus, volumetric specific heat is the heat 
energy required to raise the temperature of a unit volume of material by one degree, 
J/mm3 °C (Btu/in3 °F). 
Conduction is a fundamental heat-transfer process. It involves transfer of thermal 
energy within a material from molecule to molecule by purely thermal motions; no 
transfer of mass occurs. The thermal conductivity of a substance is therefore its capa- bility 
to transfer heat through itself by this physical mechanism. It is measured by the 
coefficient of thermal conductivity k, which has typical units of J/s mm °C (Btu/ in hr 
°F). The coefficient of thermal conductivity is generally high in metals, low in 
ceramics and plastics. 
Section 4.2/Thermal Properties 
87 
 
 
The ratio of thermal conductivity to volumetric specific heat is frequently encoun- 
tered in heat transfer analysis. It is called the thermal diffusivity K and is determined as 
 
K =  k  
rC 
(4.3) 
Thermal diffusivity is used to calculate cutting temperatures in machining (Section 
20.5.1). 
 
 
4.2.2 THERMAL PROPERTIES IN MANUFACTURING 
 
Thermal properties play an important role in manufacturing because heat genera- 
tion is common in so many processes. In some operations heat is the energy that ac- 
complishes the process; in others heat is generated as a consequence of the process. 
Specific heat is of interest for several reasons. In processes that require heating of 
the material (e.g., casting, heat treating, and hot metal forming), specific heat deter- 
mines the amount of heat energy needed to raise the temperature to a desired level, 
according to Equation (4.2). 
In many processes carried out at ambient temperature, the mechanical energy to 
perform the operation is converted to heat, which raises the temperature of the work 
part. This is common in machining and cold forming of metals. The temperature rise is 
a function of the metal’s specific heat. Coolants are often used in machining to reduce these 
temperatures, and here the fluid’s heat capacity is critical. Water is almost always 
employed as the base for these fluids because of its high heat-carrying capacity. 
Thermal conductivity functions to dissipate heat in manufacturing processes, 
sometimes beneficially, sometimes not. In mechanical processes such as metal form- 
ing and machining, much of the power required to operate the process is converted 
to heat. The ability of the work material and tooling to conduct heat away from its 
source is highly desirable in these processes. 
On the other hand, high thermal conductivity of the work metal is undesirable 
in fusion welding processes such as arc welding. In these operations, the heat input 
must be concentrated at the joint location so that the metal can be melted. For exam- 
ple, copper is generally difficult to weld because its high thermal conductivity allows heat 
to be conducted from the energy source into the work too rapidly, inhibiting heat 
buildup for melting at the joint. 
 
Mass Diffusion 
In addition to heat transfer in a material, there is also mass transfer. Mass diffusion 
involves movement of atoms or molecules within a material or across a boundary 
between two materials in contact. It is perhaps more appealing to one’s intuition that 
such a phenomenon occurs in liquids and gases, but it also occurs in solids. It occurs 
in pure metals, in alloys, and between materials that share a common interface. Be- 
cause of thermal agitation of the atoms in a material (solid, liquid, or gas), atoms are 
continuously moving about. In liquids and gases, where the level of thermal agitation 
is high, it is a free-roaming movement. In solids (metals in particular), the atomic 
motion is facilitated by vacancies and other imperfections in the crystal structure. 
Diffusion can be illustrated by the series of sketches in Figure 4.2 for the case of 
two metals suddenly brought into intimate contact with each other. At the start, both 
4.3 
Section 4.3/Mass Diffusion 
89 
 
dt 
 
 
Interface 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Pure A 
Pure B 
A 
A and B 
B 
Uniform mixture of A and B 
(1) 
(2) 
(a) 
(3) 
 
 
 
FIGURE 4.2  Mass diffusion: (a) model of atoms in two solid blocks in contact: (1) at the start when two pieces are 
brought together, they each have their individual compositions; (2) after some time, an exchange of atoms has 
occurred; and (3) eventually, a condition of uniform concentration occurs. The concentration gradient dc/dx for 
metal A is plotted in (b) of the figure. 
 
 
metals have their own atomic structure; but with time there is an exchange of atoms, 
not only across the boundary, but within the separate pieces. Given enough time, the 
assembly of two pieces will finally reach a uniform composition throughout. 
Temperature is an important factor in diffusion. At higher temperatures, thermal 
agitation is greater and the atoms can move about more freely. Another factor is the 
concentration gradient dc/dx, which indicates the concentration of the two types of 
atoms in a direction of interest defined by x. The concentration gradient is plotted in 
Figure 4.2(b) to correspond to the instantaneous distribution of atoms in the assembly. The 
relationship often used to describe mass diffusion is Fick’s first law: 
dm = -D ( dc ) A dt 
(4.4) 
where dm = small amount of material transferred, D = diffusion coefficient of the 
metal, which increases rapidly with temperature, dc/dx = concentration gradient, A 
= area of the boundary, and dt represents a small time increment. An alternative 
expression of Equation (4.4) gives the mass diffusion rate: 
dm = -D ( dc ) A 
(4.5) 
dt 
dt 
Section 4.3/Mass Diffusion 
89 
 
L 
r 
 
Although these equations are difficult to use in calculations because of the prob- 
lem of assessing D, they are helpful in understanding diffusion and the variables on 
which D depends. 
Mass diffusion is used in several processes. A number of surface-hardening treat- ments 
are based on diffusion (Section 26.4), including carburizing and nitriding. Among 
the welding processes, diffusion welding (Section 29.5.2) is used to join two components 
by pressing them together and allowing diffusion to occur across the boundary to 
create a permanent bond. Diffusion is also used in electronics manufac- turing to alter the 
surface chemistry of a semiconductor chip in microscopic local- ized regions to 
create circuit details (Section 33.4.3). 
 
Electrical Properties 
Engineering materials exhibit a great variation in their capacity to conduct electric- 
ity. This section defines the physical properties by which this capacity is measured. 
 
4.4.1 RESISTIVITY AND CONDUCTIVITY 
 
The flow of electrical current involves movement of charge carriers—infinitesimally 
small particles possessing an electrical charge. In solids, these charge carriers are elec- 
trons. In a liquid solution, charge carriers are positive and negative ions. The move- 
ment of charge carriers is driven by the presence of an electric voltage and resisted by 
the inherent characteristics of the material, such as atomic structure and bonding 
between atoms and molecules. This is the familiar relationship defined by Ohm’s law: 
I = E 
R 
(4.6) 
where I = current, A; E = voltage, V; and R = electrical resistance, !1. The resistance 
in a uniform section of material (e.g., a wire) depends on its length L, cross-sectional area 
A, and the resistivity of the material r; thus, 
R = r  L 
A 
or 
r = R A 
(4.7) 
where resistivity has units of !1-m2/m or !1-m (!1-in). Resistivity is the basic property 
that defines a material’s capability to resist current flow. Table 4.3 lists values of re- 
sistivity for selected materials. Resistivity is not a constant; instead it varies, as do so 
many other properties, with temperature. For metals, it increases with temperature. 
It is often more convenient to consider a material as conducting electrical current 
rather than resisting its flow. The conductivity of a material is simply the reciprocal 
of resistivity: 
Electrical conductivity = 1 
(4.8) 
where conductivity has units of (!1-m)-1 ((!1-in)-1). 
 
4.4.2 CLASSES OF MATERIALS BY ELECTRICAL PROPERTIES 
 
Metals are the best conductors of electricity, because of their metallic bonding. They 
have the lowest resistivity (Table 4.3). Most ceramics and polymers, whose electrons 
are tightly bound by covalent and/or ionic bonding, are poor conductors. Many of these 
materials are used as insulators because they possess high resistivities. 
4.4 
Section 4.4/Electrical Properties 
91 
 
 
TABLE • 4.3 Resistivity of selected materials. 
Resistivity 
Material 
V-m 
V-in 
Conductors 
10-6-10-8 
10-4-10-7 
Aluminum 
2.8 X 10-8 
1.1 X 10-6 
Aluminum alloys 
 4.0 X 10-8a 
 1.6 X 10-6a 
Cast iron 
65.0 X 10-8a 
25.6 X 10-6a 
Copper 
1.7 X 10-8 
0.67 X 10-6 
Gold 
2.4 X 10-8 
0.95 X 10-6 
Iron 
9.5 X 10-8 
3.7 X 10-6 
Lead 
20.6 X 10-8 
8.1 X 10-6 
Magnesium 
4.5 X 10-8 
1.8 X 10-6 
Nickel 
6.8 X 10-8 
2.7 X 10-6 
Silver 
1.6 X 10-8 
0.63 X 10-6 
 
 
Resistivity 
Material 
V-m 
V-in 
Conductors, continued 
Steel, low C 
17.0 X 10-8 
6.7 X 10-6 
Steel, stainless 
70.0 X 10-8a 
27.6 X 10-6 
Tin 
11.5 X 10-8 
4.5 X 10-6 
Zinc 
6.0 X 10-8 
2.4 X 10-6 
Carbon 
5000 X 10-8b 
2000 X 10-6b 
Semiconductors 
101-105 
102-107 
Silicon 
1.0 X 103 
0.4 X 105 
Insulators 
1012-1015 
1013–1017 
Natural rubber 
1.0 X 1012b 
0.4 X 1014b 
Polyethylene 
100 X 1012b 
40 X 1014b 
Compiled from various standard sources. 
aValue varies with alloy composition. 
bValue is approximate. 
 
 
 
 
An insulator is sometimes referred to as a dielectric, because the term dielectric 
means nonconductor of direct current. It is a material that can be placed between 
two electrodes without conducting current between them. However, if the voltage is 
high enough, the current will suddenly pass through the material, for example, in the form 
of an arc. The dielectric strength of an insulating material, then, is the electrical potential 
required to break down the insulator per unit thickness. Appropriate units are 
volts/m (volts/in). 
In addition to conductors and insulators (or dielectrics), there are also supercon- 
ductors and semiconductors. A superconductor is a material that exhibits zero resis- 
tivity. It is a phenomenon that has been observed in certain materials at low tempera- 
tures approaching absolute zero. We might expect the existence of this phenomenon, 
due to the significant effect that temperature has on resistivity. That these supercon- 
ducting materials exist is of great scientific interest. If materials could be developed 
that exhibit this property at more normal temperatures, there would be significant 
practical implications in power transmission, electronic switching speeds, and mag- 
netic field applications. 
Semiconductors have already proven their practical worth. Their applications 
range from mainframe computers to household appliances and automotive engine 
controllers. As one would guess, a semiconductor is a material whose resistivity 
lies between insulators and conductors. The typical range is shown in Table 4.3. 
The most commonly used semiconductor material today is silicon (Section 7.5.2), 
largely because of its abundance in nature, relative low cost, and ease of processing. 
What makes semiconductors unique is the capacity to significantly alter conductivi- 
ties in their surface chemistries in microscopic areas to fabricate integrated circuits 
(Chapter 33). 
Electrical properties play an important role in various manufacturing processes. 
Some of the nontraditional processes use electrical energy to remove material. 
Electric discharge machining (Section 25.3.1) uses the heat generated by electrical 
energy in the form of sparks to remove material from metals. Most of the important 
Section 4.4/Electrical Properties 
91 
 
4 
4 
4 
4 
2 
2 
4 
2 
 
welding processes use electrical energy to melt the joint metal. Finally, the capacity 
to alter electrical properties of semiconductor materials is the basis for microelec- 
tronics manufacturing. 
 
Electrochemical Processes 
Electrochemistry is a field of science concerned with the relationship between electric- 
ity and chemical changes, and with the conversion of electrical and chemical energy. 
In a water solution, the molecules of an acid, base, or salt are dissociated into 
positively and negatively charged ions. These ions are the charge carriers in the 
solution—they allow electric current to be conducted, playing the same role that 
electrons play in metallic conduction. The ionized solution is called an electrolyte; 
and electrolytic conduction requires that current enter and leave the solution at 
electrodes. The positive electrode is called the anode, and the negative electrode is 
the cathode. The whole arrangement is called an electrolytic cell. At each electrode, 
some chemical reaction occurs, such as the deposition or dissolution of material, or 
the decomposition of gas from the solution. Electrolysis is the name given to these 
chemical changes occurring in the solution. 
Consider a specific case of electrolysis: decomposition of water, illustrated in 
Figure 4.3. To accelerate the process, dilute sulfuric acid (H2SO4) is used as the elec- 
trolyte, and platinum and carbon (both chemically inert) are used as electrodes. The 
electrolyte dissociates in the ions H+ and SO =. The H+ ions are attracted to the 
negatively charged cathode; upon reaching it they acquire an electron and combine 
into molecules of hydrogen gas: 
 
2H+ + 2e → H2 (gas) 
(4.9a) 
 
The SO = ions are attracted to the anode, transferring electrons to it to form addi- 
tional sulfuric acid and liberate oxygen: 
 
2SO = - 4e + 2H O → 2H SO + O (gas) 
(4.9b) 
 
The product H2SO4 is dissociated into ions of H+ and SO = again and so the process 
continues. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 4.3 Example of electrolysis: 
decomposition of water. 
4.5 
Section 4.4/Electrical Properties 
91 
 
 
In addition to the production of hydrogen and oxygen gases, 
as illustrated by the example, electrolysis is also used in several 
other industrial processes. Two examples are (1) electroplating 
(Section 27.3.1), an operation that adds a thin coating of one 
metal (e.g., chromium) to the surface of a second metal (e.g., 
steel) for decorative or other purposes; and (2) electrochemical 
machining (Section 25.2), a process in which material is 
removed from the surface of a metal part. Both these operations 
rely on electrolysis to either add or remove material from the 
surface of a metal part. In elec- troplating, the work part is set up 
in the electrolytic circuit as the cathode, so that the positive ions 
of the coating metal are attracted to the negatively charged part. 
In elec- trochemical machining, the work part is the anode, and a 
tool with the desired shape is the cathode. The action of 
electrolysis in this setup is to remove metal from the part surface 
in regions determined by the shape of the tool as it slowly feeds 
into the work. 
The two physical laws that determine the amount of material 
deposited or removed from a metallic surface were first stated by 
the British scientist Michael Faraday: 
 
1. The mass of a substance liberated in an electrolytic cell is 
proportional to the quantity of electricity passing through 
the cell. 
2. When the same quantity of electricity is passed through 
different electrolytic cells, the masses of the substances 
liberated are proportional to their chemical equivalents. 
 
Dimensions, Surfaces, and their 
Measurement 
 
 
 
 
Chapter Contents 
5.1 Dimensions, Tolerances, and 
Related Attributes 
5.1.1 Dimensions and Tolerances 
5.1.2 Other Geometric Attributes 
5.2 Conventional Measuring Instruments 
and Gages 
5.2.1 Precision Gage Blocks 
5.2.2 Measuring Instruments for 
Linear Dimensions 
5.2.3 Comparative Instruments 
5.2.4 Fixed Gages 
5.2.5 Angular Measurements 
5.3 Surfaces 
5.3.1 Characteristics of Surfaces 
5.3.2 Surface Texture 
5.3.3 Surface Integrity 
5.4 Measurement of Surfaces 
5.4.1 Measurement of Surface 
Roughness 
5.4.2 Evaluation of Surface Integrity 
5.5 Effect of Manufacturing Processes 
In addition to mechanical and physical properties of 
materials, other factors that determine the perform- 
ance of a manufactured product include the dimen- 
sions and surfaces of its components. Dimensions are 
the linear or angular sizes of a component specified on 
the part drawing. Dimensions are important because they 
determine how well the components of a product fit 
together during assembly. When fabricating a given 
component, it is nearly impossible and very costly to 
make the part to the exact dimension given on the 
drawing. Instead a limited variation is allowed from 
the dimension, and that allowable variation is called a 
tolerance. 
The surfaces of a component are also important. 
They affect product performance, assembly fit, and 
aesthetic appeal that a potential customer might have 
for the product. A surface is the exterior boundary of 
an object with its surroundings, which may be another 
object, a fluid, or space, or combinations of these. The 
surface encloses the object’s bulk mechanical and 
physical properties. 
This chapter covers dimensions, tolerances, and 
surfaces—three attributes specified by the product 
designer and determined by the manufacturing proc- 
esses that make the parts and products. It also consid- 
ers how these attributes are assessed using measuring 
and gaging devices. Closely related topics are quality 
control and inspection, covered in Chapter 40. 
5 
95 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
96 
 
 
Dimensions, Tolerances, and Related Attributes 
The basic parameters used by design engineers to specify sizes of geometric features 
on a part drawing are defined in this section. The parameters include dimensions and 
tolerances, flatness, roundness, and angularity. 
 
 
5.1.1 DIMENSIONS AND TOLERANCES 
 
ANSI [3] defines a dimension as “a numerical value expressed in appropriate units 
of measure and indicated on a drawing and in other documents along with lines, 
symbols, and notes to define the size or geometric characteristic, or both, of a part 
or part feature.” Dimensions on part drawings represent nominal or basic sizes of 
the part and its features. These are the values that the designer would like the part 
size to be, if the part could be made to an exact size with no errors or variations in 
the fabrication process. However, there are variations in the manu- facturing 
process, which are manifested as variations in the part size. Tolerances are used to 
define the limits of the allowed variation. Quoting again from the ANSI standard 
[3], a tolerance is “the total amount by which a specific dimension is permitted to 
vary. The tolerance is the difference between the maximum and minimum limits.” 
Tolerances can be specified in several ways, illustrated in Figure 5.1. Probably most 
common is the bilateral tolerance, in which the variation is permitted in both positive and 
negative directions from the nominal dimension. For example, in Figure 5.1(a), the 
nominal dimension = 2.500 linear units (e.g., mm, in), with an allowable variation of 
0.005 units in either direction. Parts outside these limits are unacceptable. It is pos- sible 
for a bilateral tolerance to be unbalanced; for example, 2.500 + 0.010, -0.005 
dimensional units. A unilateral tolerance is one in which the variation from the speci- fied 
dimension is permitted in only one direction, either positive or negative, as in 
Figure 5.1(b). Limit dimensions are an alternative method to specify the permissible 
variation in a part feature size; they consist of the maximum and minimum dimensions 
allowed, as in Figure 5.1(c). 
 
 
5.1.2 
OTHER GEOMETRIC ATTRIBUTES 
 
Dimensions and tolerances are normally expressed as linear (length) values. There 
are other geometric attributes of parts that are also important, such as flatness of a 
surface, roundness of a shaft or hole, parallelism between two surfaces, and so on. 
Definitions of these terms are listed in Table 5.1. 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.1 Three 
ways to specify 
tolerance limits for a 
nominal dimension of 
2.500: (a) bilateral, (b) 
unilateral, and (c) limit 
dimensions. 
5. 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
97 
 
 
TABLE • 5.1  Definitions of geometric attributes of parts. 
Angularity—The extent to which a part feature such 
as a surface or axis is at a specified angle relative to 
a reference surface. If the angle = 90°, then the 
attribute is called perpendicularity or squareness. 
Circularity—For a surface of revolution such as 
a cylinder, circular hole, or cone, circularity is the 
degree to which all points on the intersection of 
the surface and a plane perpendicular to the axis 
of revolution are equidistant from the axis. For a 
sphere, circularity is the degree to which all points 
on the intersection of the surface and a plane 
passing through the center are equidistant from 
the center. 
Concentricity—The degree to which any two (or 
more) part features such as a cylindrical surface and 
a circular hole have a common axis. 
 
 
Cylindricity—The degree to which all points on a 
surface of revolution such as a cylinder are equidistant 
from the axis of revolution. 
Flatness—The extent to which all points on a surface 
lie in a single plane. 
Parallelism—The degree to which all points on a part 
feature such as a surface, line, or axis are equidistant 
from a reference plane or line or axis. 
Perpendicularity—The degree to which all points on 
a part feature such as a surface, line, or axis are 90° 
from a reference plane or line or axis. 
Roundness—Same as circularity. 
Squareness—Same as perpendicularity. 
Straightness—The degree to which a part feature 
such as a line or axis is a straight line. 
 
 
Measuring Instruments and Gages 
Measurement is a procedure in which an unknown quantity is compared with a 
known standard, using an accepted and consistent system of units. Two systems of 
units have evolved in the world: (1) the U.S. customary system (U.S.C.S.), and (2) the 
International System of Units (or SI, for Systeme Internationale d’Unites), more 
popularly known as the metric system (Historical Note 5.1). Both systems are used 
in parallel throughout this book. The metric system is widely accepted in nearly 
every part of the industrialized world except the United States, which has stubbornly clung 
to its U.S.C.S. Gradually, the United States is adopting SI. 
 
 
5.2 
 
Measurement systems in ancient civilizations were
basic linear measure of the Greeks was the finger (about 
based on dimensions of the human body. Egyptians 19 mm or 3/4 in), and 16 fingers equaled one foot. The 
developed the cubit as a linear measurement standard
Romans adopted and adapted the Greek system, speci- 
around 3000 BCE. The cubit was defined as the length  fically the foot, dividing it into 12 parts (called unciae). 
of a human arm and hand from elbow to fingertip. The Romans defined five feet as a pace and 5000 feet 
Although there were difficulties due to variations in arm  as a mile (such a nice round number, how did we end up 
lengths, the cubit was standardized in the form of a  with 5280 feet in a mile?). 
master cubit made of granite.This standard cubit, which During medieval Europe, various national and re- 
measured 524 mm (26.6 in), was used to produce other gional measurement systems developed, many of 
cubit sticks throughout Egypt. The standard cubit was them based on the Roman standards. Two primary 
divided into digits (a human finger width), with 28 dig- systems emerged in the Western world, the English 
 
hand. Thus, a system of measures and standards was defined the yard “as the distance from the thumb 
 
 
 
world passed to the Greeks and then the Romans. The 12 inches. The American colonies were tied to England, 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
98 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Measurement provides a numerical value of the quantity of interest, within cer- 
tain limits of accuracy and precision. Accuracy is the degree to which the measured 
value agrees with the true value of the quantity of interest. A measurement proce- 
dure is accurate when it is absent of systematic errors, which are positive or negative 
deviations from the true value that are consistent from one measurement to the next. 
Precision is the degree of repeatability in the measurement process. Good precision 
means that random errors in the measurement procedure are minimized. Random 
errors are usually associated with human participation in the measurement process. 
Examples include variations in the setup, imprecise reading of the scale, round-off 
approximations, and so on. Nonhuman contributors to random error include tem- 
perature changes, gradual wear and/or misalignment in the working elements of the 
device, and other variations. 
Closely related to measurement is gaging. Gaging (also spelled gauging) deter- 
mines simply whether the part characteristic meets or does not meet the design spec- 
ification. It is usually faster than measuring, but scant information is provided about 
the actual value of the characteristic of interest. 
This section considers the variety of manually operated measuring instruments 
and gages used to evaluate dimensions such as length and diameter, as well as fea- 
tures such as angles, straightness, and roundness. This type of equipment is found in 
metrology labs, inspection departments, and tool rooms. The logical starting topic is 
precision gage blocks. 
 
 
5.2.1 PRECISION GAGE BLOCKS 
 
Precision gage blocks are the standards against which other dimensional measuring 
instruments and gages are compared. Gage blocks are usually square or rectangu- 
lar. The measuring surfaces are finished to be dimensionally accurate and parallel to 
and it was therefore natural for the United States to of course). Multiples and subdivisions of the meter 
adopt the same system of measurements at the time  were based on Greek prefixes. 
of its independence. This became the U.S. customary  
Dissemination of the metric system throughout 
system (U.S.C.S.). 
 
Europe during the early 1800s was encouraged by the 
The initial proposal for the metric system is cred- 
military successes of French armies under Napoleon. In 
ited to vicar G. Mouton of Lyon, France around 1670. other parts of the world, adoption of the metric system 
His proposal included three important features that occurred over many years and was often motivated by 
were subsequently incorporated into the metric 
significant political changes. This was the case in Japan, 
standards: (1) the basic unit was defined in terms of  China, the Soviet Union (Russia), and Latin America. 
a measurement of the Earth, which was presumed  An act of British Parliament in 1963 redefined the constant; 
(2) the units were subdivided decimally; and  English system of weights and measures in terms of 
(3) units had rational prefixes. Mouton’s proposal was metric units and mandated a changeover to metric 
discussed and debated among scientists in France for  two years later, thus aligning Britain with the rest of 
the next 125 years. A result of the French Revolution
Europe and leaving the United States as the only major 
was the adoption of the metric system of weights  industrial nation that was nonmetric. In 1960, an inter- 
and measures (in 1795). The basic unit of length was
national conference on weights and measures in Paris 
the meter, which was then defined as 1/10,000,000  reached agreement on new standards based on the 
of the length of the meridian between the North  metric system. Thus the metric system became the 
Pole and the Equator, and passing through Paris (but
Systeme Internationale (SI). 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
99 
 
 
within several millionths of an inch and are polished to a mirror finish. Several grades 
of precision gage blocks are available, with closer tolerances for higher precision 
grades. The highest grade—the master laboratory standard—is made to a tolerance of 
±0.000,03 mm (±0.000,001 in). Depending on degree of hardness desired and price the 
user is willing to pay, gage blocks can be made out of any of several hard materi- als, 
including tool steel, chrome-plated steel, chromium carbide, or tungsten carbide. 
Precision gage blocks are available in certain standard sizes or in sets, the latter 
containing a variety of different-sized blocks. The sizes in a set are systematically 
determined so they can be stacked to achieve virtually any dimension desired to within 
0.0025 mm (0.0001 in). 
For best results, gage blocks must be used on a flat reference surface, such as a 
surface plate. A surface plate is a large solid block whose top surface is finished to a 
flat plane. Most surface plates today are made of granite. Granite has the advantage 
of being hard, non-rusting, nonmagnetic, long wearing, thermally stable, and easy to 
maintain. 
Gage blocks and other high-precision measuring instruments must be used under 
standard conditions of temperature and other factors that might adversely affect the 
measurement. By international agreement, 20°C (68°F) has been established as the 
standard temperature. Metrology labs operate at this standard. If gage blocks or other 
measuring instruments are used in a factory environment in which the temperature 
differs from this standard, corrections for thermal expansion or contraction may be 
required. Also, working gage blocks used for inspection in the shop are subject to 
wear and must be calibrated periodically against more precise laboratory gage blocks. 
 
 
5.2.2 
MEASURING INSTRUMENTS FOR LINEAR DIMENSIONS 
 
Measuring instruments can be divided into two types: graduated and nongraduated. 
Graduated measuring devices include a set of markings (called graduations) on a 
linear or angular scale to which the object’s feature of interest can be compared for 
measurement. Nongraduated measuring devices possess no such scale and are used 
to make comparisons between dimensions or to transfer a dimension for measure- 
ment by a graduated device. 
The most basic of the graduated measuring devices is the rule (made of steel, and 
often called a steel rule), used to measure linear dimensions. Rules are available in 
various lengths. Metric rule lengths include 150, 300, 600, and 1000 mm, with gradu- 
ations of 1 or 0.5 mm. Common U.S. sizes are 6, 12, and 24 in, with graduations of 
1/32, 1/64, or 1/100 in. 
Calipers are available in either nongraduated or graduated styles. A nongradu- 
ated caliper (referred to simply as a caliper) consists of two legs joined by a hinge 
mechanism, as in Figure 5.2. The ends of the legs are made to contact the surfaces 
of the object being measured, and the hinge is designed to hold the legs in position 
during use. The contacts point either inward or outward. When they point inward, 
as in Figure 5.2, the instrument is an outside caliper and is used for measuring out- 
side dimensions such as a diameter. When the contacts point outward, it is an inside 
caliper, which is used to measure the distance between two internal surfaces. An 
instrument similar in configuration to the caliper is a divider, except that both legs 
are straight and terminate in hard, sharply pointed contacts. Dividers are used for 
scaling distances between two points or lines on a surface, and for scribing circles or 
arcs onto a surface. 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
100 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.2 Two sizes 
of outside calipers. 
(Courtesy of L. S. 
Starrett Co.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.3 Slide 
caliper, opposite sides 
of instrument shown. 
(Courtesy of L. S. 
Starrett Co.) 
A variety of graduated calipers are available for various measurement purposes. 
The simplest is the slide caliper, which consists of a steel rule to which two jaws are 
added, one fixed at the end of the rule and the other movable, shown in Figure 5.3. 
Slide calipers can be used for inside or outside measurements, depending on whether 
the inside or outside jaw faces are used. In use, the jaws are forced into contact with 
the part surfaces to be measured, and the location of the movable jaw indicates the 
 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
101 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.4 Vernier 
caliper. (Courtesy of 
L. S. Starrett Co.) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.5 External 
micrometer, standard 
1-in size with digital 
readout. (Courtesy of 
L. S. Starrett Co.) 
dimension of interest. Slide calipers permit more accurate and precise measurements than 
simple rules. A refinement of the slide caliper is the vernier caliper, shown in Figure 
5.4. In this device, the movable jaw includes a vernier scale, named after P. Vernier 
(1580–1637), a French mathematician who invented it. The vernier provides graduations 
of 0.01 mm in the SI (and 0.001 inch in the U.S. customary scale), much more precise 
than the slide caliper. 
The micrometer is a widely used and very accurate measuring device, the most com- 
mon form of which consists of a spindle and a C-shaped anvil, as in Figure 5.5. The 
spindle is moved relative to the fixed anvil by means of an accurate screw thread. On a 
typical U.S. micrometer, each rotation of the spindle provides 0.025 in of linear travel. 
Attached to the spindle is a thimble graduated with 25 marks around its circumference, 
 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
102 
 
 
each mark corresponding to 0.001 in. The micrometer sleeve is usually equipped with 
a vernier, allowing resolutions as close as 0.0001 in. On a micrometer with metric scale, 
graduations are 0.01 mm. Modern micrometers (and graduated calipers) are available 
with electronic devices that display a digital readout of the measurement (as in the 
figure). These instruments are easier to read and eliminate much of the human error 
associated with reading conventional graduated devices. 
The most common micrometer types are (1) external micrometer, Figure 5.5, also 
called an outside micrometer, which comes in a variety of standard anvil sizes; (2) 
internal micrometer, or inside micrometer, which consists of a head assembly and a 
set of rods of different lengths to measure various inside dimensions that might be 
encountered; and (3) depth micrometer, similar to an inside micrometer but adapted to 
measure hole depths. 
 
 
5.2.3 COMPARATIVE INSTRUMENTS 
 
Comparative instruments are used to make dimensional comparisons between two 
objects, such as a work part and a reference surface. They are usually not capable of 
providing an absolute measurement of the quantity of interest; instead, they measure 
the magnitude and direction of the deviation between two objects. Instruments in 
this category include mechanical and electronic gages. 
 
Mechanical Gages: Dial Indicators Mechanical gages are designed to mechani- 
cally magnify the deviation to permit observation. The most common instrument in 
this category is the dial indicator, Figure 5.6, which converts and amplifies the linear 
movement of a contact pointer into rotation of a dial needle. The dial is graduated in 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.6 Dial indicator showing dial and 
graduated face. (Courtesy of L. S. Starrett Co.) 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
103 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.7 Dial 
indicator setup to measure 
runout; as part is rotated 
about its center, variations 
in outside surface relative 
to center are indicated on 
the dial. 
 
 
 
small units such as 0.01 mm (or 0.001 in). Dial indicators are used in many applications to 
measure straightness, flatness, parallelism, squareness, roundness, and run-out. A 
typical setup for measuring run-out is illustrated in Figure 5.7. 
 
Electronic Gages Electronic gages are a family of measuring and gaging instru- 
ments based on transducers capable of converting a linear displacement into an 
electrical signal. The electrical signal is then amplified and transformed into a suita- 
ble data format such as a digital readout, as in Figure 5.5. Applications of electronic gages 
have grown rapidly in recent years, driven by advances in microprocessor 
technology. They are gradually replacing many of the conventional measuring and 
gaging devices. Advantages of electronic gages include (1) good sensitivity, accu- 
racy, precision, repeatability, and speed of response; (2) ability to sense very small 
dimensions—down to 0.025 mm (1 m-in.); (3) ease of operation; (4) reduced human error; 
(5) electrical signal that can be displayed in various formats; and (6) capabil- ity to 
be interfaced with computer systems for data processing. 
 
 
5.2.4 
FIXED GAGES 
 
A fixed gage is a physical replica of the part dimension to be assessed. There are 
two basic categories: master gage and limit gage. A master gage is fabricated to be a 
direct replica of the nominal size of the part dimension. It is generally used for set- 
ting up a comparative measuring instrument, such as a dial indicator; or for calibrat- 
ing a measuring device. 
A limit gage is fabricated to be a reverse replica of the part dimension and is 
designed to check the dimension at one or more of its tolerance limits. A limit gage 
often consists of two gages in one piece, the first for checking the lower limit of the 
tolerance on the part dimension, and the other for checking the upper limit. These 
gages are popularly known as GO/NO-GO gages, because one gage limit allows 
the part to be inserted, whereas the other limit does not. The GO limit is used to check 
the dimension at its maximum material condition; this is the minimum size for an 
internal feature such as a hole, and it is the maximum size for an external fea- ture 
such as an outside diameter. The NO-GO limit is used to inspect the minimum 
material condition of the dimension in question. 
Common limit gages are snap gages and ring gages for checking outside part 
dimensions, and plug gages for checking inside dimensions. A snap gage consists 
of a C-shaped frame with gaging surfaces located in the jaws of the frame, as in 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
104 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.8 Snap gage for 
measuring diameter of a part; 
difference in height of GO and 
NO-GO gage buttons is 
exaggerated. 
 
 
 
Figure 5.8. It has two gage buttons, the first being the GO gage, and the second 
being the NO-GO gage. Snap gages are used for checking outside dimensions such as 
diameter, width, thickness, and similar surfaces. 
Ring gages are used for checking cylindrical diameters. For a given application, a pair 
of gages is usually required, one GO and the other NO-GO. Each gage is a ring 
whose opening is machined to one of the tolerance limits of the part diameter. For 
ease of handling, the outside of the ring is knurled. The two gages are distinguished 
by the presence of a groove around the outside of the NO-GO ring. 
The most common limit gage for checking hole diameter is the plug gage. The 
typical gage consists of a handle to which are attached two accurately ground cylin- 
drical pieces (plugs) of hardened steel, as in Figure 5.9. The cylindrical plugs serve as 
the GO and NO-GO gages. Other gages similar to the plug gage include taper gages, 
consisting of a tapered plug for checking tapered holes; and thread gages, in which 
the plug is threaded for checking internal threads on parts. 
A wear allowance is usually added to the GO limit (maximum material condition) 
of fixed gages, especially ones that are used frequently. This allowance is expected 
to account for gradual wearing of the gage GO surface against the part surfaces 
that are being checked. The wear allowance is typically specified as a percent that is 
applied to the total tolerance band of the part dimension of interest. 
 
 
 
Example 5.1 
Wear allowance 
on a fixed gage 
A GO/NO GO plug gage is designed to check a hole diameter that is 
dimensioned 20.00 mm ± 0.10 mm. A wear allowance of 2.5% of the total 
tolerance band is applied to the GO side of the gage. Determine the 
nominal sizes of the GO and NO GO sides of the gage. 
Solution: The total tolerance band = 0.10 + 0.10 = 0.20 mm. The wear 
allowance = 0.025(0.20) = 0.005 mm. The GO gage is used to check the 
minimum acceptable hole diameter, which is 20.00 - 0.10 = 19.90 mm. 
Because this is the surface that will wear, the wear allowance is applied to it. 
Accordingly, the nominal size of the GO gage = 19.90 + 0.005 = 19.905 mm. 
The NO GO gage is used to check the maximum hole diameter. Because 
insertion of the gage will occur only in an out-of-tolerance situation, its wear 
should be negligible. Therefore, the nominal size of the NO GO gage = 
20.00 + 0.10 = 20.10 mm. 
 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
105 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.9 Plug gage; difference 
in diameters of GO and NO-GO plugs 
is exaggerated. 
 
 
Fixed gages are easy to use, and the time required to complete an inspection is 
almost always less than when a measuring instrument is employed. Fixed gages were 
a fundamental element in the development of interchangeable parts manufacturing 
(Historical Note 1.1). They provided the means by which parts could be made to 
tolerances that were sufficiently close for assembly without filing and fitting. Their 
disadvantage is that they provide little if any information on the actual part size; 
they only indicate whether the size is within tolerance. Today, with the availability of high-
speed electronic measuring instruments, and with the need for statistical proc- ess 
control of part sizes, use of gages is gradually giving way to instruments that 
provide actual measurements of the dimension of interest. 
 
 
5.2.5 ANGULAR MEASUREMENTS 
 
Angles can be measured using any of several styles of protractor. A simple protrac- 
tor consists of a blade that pivots relative to a semicircular head that is graduated 
in angular units (e.g., degrees, radians). To use, the blade is rotated to a position 
corresponding to some part angle to be measured, and the angle is read off the 
angular scale. A bevel protractor, Figure 5.10, consists of two straight blades that 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.10 Bevel 
protractor with vernier 
scale. (Courtesy of L. S. 
Starrett Co.) 
Section 5.2/Measuring Instruments and Gages 
106 
 
L 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.11 Setup for 
using a sine bar. 
 
 
pivot relative to each other. The pivot assembly has a protractor scale that permits 
the angle formed by the blades to be read. When equipped with a vernier, the bevel 
protractor can be read to about 5 min; without a vernier the resolution is only about 
1 degree. 
High precision in angular measurements can be made using a sine bar, illustrated 
in Figure 5.11. One possible setup consists of a flat steel straight edge (the sine 
bar), and two precision rolls set a known distance apart on the bar. The straight 
edge is aligned with the part angle to be measured, and gage blocks are used or 
other accurate linear measurements are made to determine height. The proce- dure 
is carried out on a surface plate to achieve the most accurate results. This height H 
and the length L of the sine bar between rolls are used to calculate the angle A using 
sin A = H 
 
(5.2) 
 
 
Example 5.2 
Sine bar 
measurement 
A sine bar that is 200.00 mm long is used to measure the angle on a part in 
a setup similar to that in Figure 5.11. Gage blocks are stacked to a height of 
40.380 mm. Determine the angle of interest. 
Solution: sin A =  40.38  = 0.2019, A = sin-1(0.2019) = 11.64°. 
200.00 
 
 
Surfaces 
A surface is what one touches when holding an object such as a manufactured part. 
The designer specifies the part dimensions, relating the various surfaces to each other. 
These nominal surfaces, representing the intended surface contour of the part, are 
defined by lines in the engineering drawing. The nominal surfaces appear as 
absolutely straight lines, ideal circles, round holes, and other edges and surfaces that 
are geometrically perfect. The actual surfaces of a manufactured part are deter- mined 
by the processes used to make it. The variety of processes available in manu- facturing 
result in wide variations in surface characteristics, and it is important for engineers to 
understand the technology of surfaces. 
5.3 
Section 5.3/Surfaces 
107 
 
 
Surfaces are commercially and technologically important for a number of reasons, 
different reasons for different applications: (1) Aesthetic reasons—surfaces that are 
smooth and free of scratches and blemishes are more likely to give a favorable 
impression to the customer. (2) Surfaces affect safety. (3) Friction and wear depend on 
surface characteristics. (4) Surfaces affect mechanical and physical properties; for 
example, surface flaws can be points of stress concentration. (5) Assembly of parts is 
affected by their surfaces; for example, the strength of adhesively bonded joints 
(Section 30.3) is increased when the surfaces are slightly rough. (6) Smooth surfaces 
make better electrical contacts. 
Surface technology is concerned with (1) defining the characteristics of a surface, 
(2) surface texture, (3) surface integrity, and (4) the relationship between manufac- 
turing processes and the characteristics of the resulting surface. The first three topics 
are covered in this section, and the final topic is presented in Section 5.5. 
 
 
5.3.1 
CHARACTERISTICS OF SURFACES 
 
A microscopic view of a part’s surface reveals its irregularities and imperfections. 
The features of a typical surface are illustrated in the highly magnified cross sec- 
tion of the surface of a metal part in Figure 5.12. Although the discussion here 
is focused on metallic surfaces, these comments apply to ceramics and polymers, 
with modifications owing to differences in structure of these materials. The bulk of 
the part, referred to as the substrate, has a grain structure that depends on previous 
processing of the metal; for example, the metal’s substrate structure is affected 
by its chemical composition, the casting process originally used on the metal, 
and any deformation operations and heat treatments performed on the casting. 
The exterior of the part is a surface whose topography is anything but straight 
and smooth. In this highly magnified cross section, the surface has roughness, wavi- 
ness, and flaws. Although not shown here, it also possesses a pattern and/or direction 
resulting from the mechanical process that produced it. All of these geometric fea- 
tures are included in the term surface texture. 
Just below the surface is a layer of metal whose structure differs from that 
of the substrate. This is called the altered layer, and it is a manifestation of the 
actions that have been visited upon the surface during its creation and after- ward. 
Manufacturing processes involve energy, usually in large amounts, which operates 
on the part against its surface. The altered layer may result from work hardening 
(mechanical energy), heating (thermal energy), chemical treatment, or even 
electrical energy. The metal in this layer is affected by the application 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.12 A magnified 
cross section of a typical 
metallic part surface. 
Section 5.3/Surfaces 
108 
 
 
of energy, and its microstructure is altered accordingly. This altered layer falls 
within the scope of surface integrity, which is concerned with the definition, 
specification, and control of the surface layers of a material (most commonly 
metals) in manufacturing and subsequent performance in service. The scope of 
surface integrity is usually interpreted to include surface texture as well as the 
altered layer beneath. 
In addition, most metal surfaces are coated with an oxide film, given sufficient 
time after processing for the film to form. Aluminum forms a hard, dense, thin film 
of Al2O3 on its surface (which serves to protect the substrate from corrosion), and 
iron forms oxides of several chemistries on its surface (rust, which provides virtually 
no protection at all). There is also likely to be moisture, dirt, oil, adsorbed gases, and other 
contaminants on the part’s surface. 
 
 
5.3.2 
SURFACE TEXTURE 
 
Surface texture consists of the repetitive and/or random deviations from the nomi- nal 
surface of an object; it is defined by four features: roughness, waviness, lay, and flaws, 
shown in Figure 5.13. Roughness refers to the small, finely spaced deviations from the 
nominal surface that are determined by the material characteristics and the process that 
formed the surface. Waviness is defined as the deviations of much larger spacing; they 
occur because of work deflection, vibration, heat treatment, and similar factors. 
Roughness is superimposed on waviness. Lay is the predominant direction or pattern 
of the surface texture. It is determined by the manufacturing method used to create the 
surface, usually from the action of a cutting tool. Figure 5.14 presents most of the 
possible lays a surface can take, together with the symbol used by a designer to specify 
them. Finally, flaws are irregularities that occur occasionally on the sur- face; these 
include cracks, scratches, inclusions, and similar defects in the surface. Although some 
of the flaws relate to surface texture, they also affect surface integrity (Section 5.3.3). 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.13 Surface 
texture features. 
Section 5.3/Surfaces 
109 
 
z n 
 
 
FIGURE 5.14  Possible lays of a surface. ([1]). 
 
 
Surface Roughness and Surface Finish Surface roughness is a measurable 
characteristic based on the roughness deviations as defined above. Surface finish 
is a more subjective term denoting smoothness and general quality of a surface. In 
popular usage, surface finish is often used as a synonym for surface roughness. 
The most commonly used measure of surface texture is surface roughness. With 
respect to Figure 5.15, surface roughness can be defined as the average of the 
vertical deviations from the nominal surface over a specified surface length. An 
arithmetic average (AA) is generally used, based on the absolute values of the 
deviations, and this roughness value is referred to by the name average roughness. 
In equation form, 
 
Lm 
Ra = J 
0 
|y| dx 
(5.1) 
Lm 
where Ra = arithmetic mean value of roughness, m (in); y = the vertical deviation 
from nominal surface (converted to absolute value), m (in); and Lm = the speci- 
fied distance over which the surface deviations are measured. An approximation of 
Equation (5.1), perhaps easier to comprehend, is given by 
n |yi| 
Ra = 
(5.2) 
i=1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.15 
Deviations from 
nominal surface used 
in the two definitions of 
surface roughness. 
Section 5.3/Surfaces 
110 
 
 
where Ra has the same meaning as above; yi = vertical deviations converted to abso- 
lute value and identified by the subscript i, m (in); and n = the number of deviations 
included in Lm. The units in these equations are meters and inches. In fact, the scale 
of the deviations is very small, so more appropriate units are mm (mm = m X 10-6 = 
mm X 10-3) or m-in (m-in = inch X 10-6). These are the units commonly used to 
express surface roughness. 
The AA method is the most widely used averaging method for surface roughness 
today. An alternative, sometimes used in the United States, is the root-mean-square 
(RMS) average, which is the square root of the mean of the squared deviations over 
the measuring length. RMS surface roughness values will almost always be greater 
than the AA values because the larger deviations will figure more prominently 
in the calculation of the RMS value. 
Surface roughness suffers the same kinds of deficiencies of any single measure 
used to assess a complex physical attribute. For example, it fails to account for the 
lay of the surface pattern; thus, surface roughness may vary significantly, depending 
on the direction in which it is measured. 
Another deficiency is that waviness can be included in the Ra computation. To 
deal with this problem, a parameter called the cutoff length is used as a filter that 
separates the waviness in a measured surface from the roughness deviations. In 
effect, the cutoff length is a sampling distance along the surface. A sampling distance 
shorter than the waviness width will eliminate the vertical deviations associated with 
waviness and only include those associated with roughness. The most common cutoff 
length used in practice is 0.8 mm (0.030 in). The measuring length Lm is normally set 
at about five times the cutoff length. 
The limitations of surface roughness have motivated the development of addi- 
tional measures that more completely describe the topography of a given surface. 
These measures include three-dimensional graphical renderings of the surface, as 
described in [17]. 
 
Symbols for Surface Texture Designers specify surface texture on an engineer- 
ing drawing by means of symbols as in Figure 5.16. The symbol designating surface 
texture parameters is a check mark (looks like a square root sign), with entries as 
indicated for average roughness, waviness, cutoff, lay, and maximum roughness spac- 
ing. The symbols for lay are from Figure 5.14. 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.16  Surface texture symbols in engineering drawings: (a) the symbol, and (b) symbol with 
identification labels. Values of Ra are given in microinches; units for other measures are given in inches. 
Designers do not always specify all of the parameters on engineering drawings. 
Section 5.3/Surfaces 
111 
 
 
5.3.3 
SURFACE INTEGRITY 
 
Surface texture alone does not completely describe a surface. There may be metal- 
lurgical or other changes in the material immediately beneath the surface that can 
have a significant effect on its mechanical properties. Surface integrity is the study 
and control of this subsurface layer and any changes in it as a result of processing 
that may influence the performance of the finished part or product. This subsurface 
layer was previously referred to as the altered layer when its structure differs from 
the substrate, as in Figure 5.12. 
The possible alterations and injuries to the subsurface layer that can occur in man- 
ufacturing are listed in Table 5.2. The surface changes are caused by the application of 
various forms of energy during processing—mechanical, thermal, chemical, and 
electrical. Mechanical energy is the most common form used in manufacturing; it is 
applied against the work material in operations such as metal forming (e.g., forging, 
extrusion), pressworking, and machining. Although its primary function in these proc- 
esses is to change the geometry of the work part, mechanical energy can also cause 
residual stresses, work hardening, and cracks in the surface layers. Table 5.3 indicates 
 
TABLE • 5.2  Surface and subsurface alterations that define surface integrity.a 
Absorption are impurities that are absorbed and 
retained in surface layers of the base material, 
possibly leading to embrittlement or other property 
changes. 
Alloy depletion occurs when critical alloying 
elements are lost from the surface layers, with 
possible loss of properties in the metal. 
Cracks are narrow ruptures or separations either 
at or below the surface that alter the continuity 
of the material. Cracks are characterized by sharp 
edges and length-to-width ratios of 4:1 or more. 
They are classified as macroscopic (can be observed 
with magnification of 10X or less) and microscopic 
(requires magnification of more than 10X). 
Craters are rough surface depressions left in the 
surface by short circuit discharges; associated with 
electrical processing methods such as electric dis- 
charge machining and electrochemical machining 
(Chapter 25). 
Hardness changes refer to hardness differences at 
or near the surface. 
Heat affected zone are regions of the metal that are 
affected by the application of thermal energy; the 
regions are not melted but are sufficiently heated 
that they undergo metallurgical changes that affect 
properties. Abbreviated HAZ, the effect is most 
prominent in fusion welding operations (Chapter 29). 
Inclusions are small particles of material incorporated 
into the surface layers during processing; they are a 
discontinuity in the base material. Their composition 
usually differs from the base material. 
Intergranular attack refers to various forms of 
chemical reaction at the surface, including 
intergranular corrosion and oxidation. 
Laps, folds, seams are irregularities and defects in 
the surface caused by plastic working of overlapping 
surfaces. 
Pits are shallow depressions with rounded edges 
formed by any of several mechanisms, including 
selective etching or corrosion; removal of surface 
inclusions; mechanically formed dents; or 
electrochemical action. 
Plastic deformation refers to microstructural 
changes from deforming the metal at the surface; 
it results in strain hardening. 
Recrystallization involves the formation of new 
grains in strain hardened metals; associated with 
heating of metal parts that have been deformed. 
Redeposited metal is metal that is removed from 
the surface in the molten state and then reattached 
prior to solidification. 
Resolidified metal is a portion of the surface that is 
melted during processing and then solidified without 
detaching from the surface. The name remelted 
metal is also used for resolidified metal. Recast 
metal is a term that includes both redeposited and 
resolidified metal. 
Residual stresses are stresses remaining in the 
material after processing. 
Selective etch is a form of chemical attack that 
concentrates on certain components in the base 
material. 
 
a Compiled from [2]. 
Section 5.3/Surfaces 
112 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE • 5.3 Forms of energy applied in manufacturing and the resulting possible surface and subsurface 
alterations that can occur.a 
 
Mechanical 
Thermal 
Chemical 
Electrical 
Residual stresses in 
subsurface layer 
Metallurgical changes 
(recrystallization, grain 
size changes, phase 
changes at surface) 
Redeposited or 
resolidified material 
Heat-affected zone 
Hardness changes 
Intergranular attack 
Chemical contamination 
Changes in conductivity 
and/or magnetism 
Cracks—microscopic 
and macroscopic 
Plastic deformation 
Laps, folds, or seams 
Absorption of elements 
such as H and Cl 
Corrosion, pitting, and 
etching 
Craters resulting from 
short circuits during 
certain electrical 
processing techniques 
Voids or inclusions 
Hardness variations 
(e.g., work hardening) 
Dissolving of 
microconstituents 
Alloy depletion 
 
 
a Based on [2]. 
 
the various types of surface and subsurface alterations that are attributable to the dif- 
ferent forms of energy applied in manufacturing. Most of the alterations in the table 
refer to metals, for which surface integrity has been most intensively studied. 
 
Measurement of Surfaces 
Surfaces are described as consisting of two parameters: (1) surface texture and 
(2) surface integrity. This section is concerned with the measurement of these two 
parameters. 
 
5.4.1 
MEASUREMENT OF SURFACE ROUGHNESS 
 
Various methods are used to assess surface roughness. They can be divided into 
three categories: (1) subjective comparison with standard test surfaces, (2) stylus 
electronic instruments, and (3) optical techniques. 
Standard Test Surfaces Sets of standard surface finish blocks are available, pro- 
duced to specified roughness values. To estimate the roughness of a given test speci- 
men, the surface is compared with the standard both visually and by the “fingernail 
test.” In this test, the user gently scratches the surfaces of the specimen and the stand- ards, 
judging which standard is closest to the specimen. Standard test surfaces are a 
convenient way for a machine operator to obtain an estimate of surface roughness. 
They are also useful for design engineers in judging what value of surface roughness 
to specify on a part drawing. 
Stylus Instruments The disadvantage of the fingernail test is its subjectivity. 
Several stylus-type instruments are commercially available to measure surface 
roughness—similar to the fingernail test, but more scientific. An example is the 
instrument shown in Figure 5.17 tracing a standard test surface. In these elec- tronic 
devices, a cone-shaped diamond stylus with point radius of about 0.005 mm (0.0002 
in) and 90° tip angle is traversed across the test surface at a constant slow speed. 
The operation is depicted in Figure 5.18. As the stylus head is traversed 
horizontally, it also moves vertically to follow the surface deviations. The vertical 
movement is converted into an electronic signal that represents the topography 
5.4 
Section 5.4/Measurement of Surfaces 
113 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 5.17 Stylus-type 
instrument for measuring 
surface roughness travers- 
ing a standard test surface. 
(Courtesy of George E. 
Kane Manufacturing 
Technology Laboratory, 
Lehigh University.) 
 
of the surface. This can be displayed as either a profile of the actual surface or an 
average roughness value. Profiling devices use a separate flat plane as the nominal 
reference against which deviations are measured. The output is a plot of the sur- 
face contour along the line traversed by the stylus. This type of system can identify 
both roughness and waviness in the test surface. Averaging devices reduce the 
roughness deviations to a single value Ra. They use skids riding on the actual sur- face 
to establish the nominal reference plane. The skids act as a mechanical filter to 
reduce the effect of waviness in the surface; in effect, these averaging devices 
electronically perform the computations in Equation (5.1). 
Optical Techniques Most other surface-measuring instruments employ optical 
techniques to assess roughness. These techniques are based on light reflectance from 
the surface, light scatter or diffusion, and laser technology. They are useful in appli- 
cations where stylus contact with the surface is undesirable. Some of the techniques 
permit very-high-speed operation, thus making 100% inspection feasible. However, the 
optical techniques yield values that do not always correlate well with roughness 
measurements made by stylus-type instruments. 
 
5.4.2 
EVALUATION OF SURFACE INTEGRITY 
 
Surface integrity is more difficult to assess than surface roughness. Some of the tech- 
niques to inspect for subsurface changes are destructive to the material specimen. 
Evaluation techniques for surface integrity include the following: 
 
FIGURE 5.18 Sketch 
illustrating the operation 
of stylus-type instrument. 
Stylus head traverses 
horizontally across 
surface, while stylus 
moves vertically to follow 
surface profile. Vertical 
movement is converted 
into either (1) a profile 
of the surface or (2) the 
average roughness value. 
Section 5.4/Measurement of Surfaces 
114 
 
 
processes.b 
 
➢ Surface texture. Surface roughness, designation of lay, and other measures pro- vide 
superficial data on surface integrity. This type of testing is relatively simple to 
perform and is always included in the evaluation of surface integrity. 
➢ Visual examination. Visual examination can reveal various surface flaws such as 
cracks, craters, laps, and seams. This type of assessment is often augmented by 
fluorescent and photographic techniques. 
➢ Microstructural examination. This involves standard metallographic tech- 
niques for preparing cross sections and obtaining photomicrographs for exami- 
nation of microstructure in the surface layers compared with the substrate. 
➢ Microhardness profile. Hardness differences near the surface can be detected 
using microhardness measurement techniques such as Knoop and Vickers 
(Section 3.2.1). The part is sectioned, and hardness is plotted against distance 
below the surface to obtain a hardness profile of the cross section. 
➢ Residual stress profile. X-ray diffraction techniques can be employed to meas- 
ure residual stresses in the surface layers of a part. 
 
 
Effect of Manufacturing Processes 
The ability to achieve a certain tolerance or surface is a function of the manufactur- 
ing process. This section describes the general capabilities of various processes in 
terms of tolerance and surface roughness and surface integrity. 
Some manufacturing processes are inherently more accurate than others. Most 
machining processes are quite accurate, capable of tolerances of ±0.05 mm (±0.002 in) 
or better. By contrast, sand castings are generally inaccurate, and tolerances of 10 to 20 
times those used for machined parts should be specified. In Table 5.4, we list a variety 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Process 
 
Typical Tolerance, mm (in) 
 
Process 
Typical Tolerance, 
mm (in) 
Sand casting 
 
Abrasive 
Grinding 
Lapping 
Honing 
 
Cast iron 
±1.3 (±0.050) 
±0.008 (±0.0003) 
Steel 
±1.5 (±0.060) 
±0.005 (±0.0002) 
Aluminum 
±0.5 (±0.020) 
±0.005 (±0.0002) 
Die casting 
±0.12 (±0.005) 
Nontraditional and thermal 
Chemical machining 
Electric discharge 
Electrochem. grind 
Electrochem. machine 
Electron beam cutting 
Laser beam cutting 
Plasma arc cutting 
 
±0.08 (±0.003) 
±0.025 (±0.001) 
±0.025 (±0.001) 
±0.05 (±0.002) 
±0.08 (±0.003) 
±0.08 (±0.003) 
±1.3 (±0.050) 
Plastic molding: 
 
Polyethylene 
±0.3 (±0.010) 
Polystyrene 
±0.15 (±0.006) 
Machining: 
 
Drilling, 6 mm (0.25 in) 
+0.08/-0.03 (+0.003/-0.001) 
Milling 
±0.08 (±0.003) 
Turning 
±0.05 (±0.002) 
 
b Compiled from [4], [5], and other sources. For each process category, tolerances vary depending on process parameters. Also, 
tolerances increase with part size. 
5.5 
Section 5.4/Measurement of Surfaces 
115 
 
 
 
TABLE • 5.5 Surface roughness values produced by the various manufacturing processes.a 
 
 
Typical  
 
Typical 
Roughness 
Process 
Finish 
Roughness Range b 
Process 
Finish 
Range b 
Casting: 
Die casting 
 
Good 
 
1–2 (30–65) 
Abrasive: 
Grinding 
Honing 
Lapping 
Polishing 
Superfinish 
Nontraditional: 
Chemical milling 
Electrochemical 
Electric discharge 
Electron beam 
Laser beam 
Thermal: 
Arc welding 
Flame cutting 
Plasma arc cutting 
 
Very good 
Very good 
Excellent 
Excellent 
Excellent 
 
Medium 
Good 
Medium 
Medium 
Medium 
 
Poor 
Poor 
Poor 
 
0.1–2 (5–75) 
0.1–1 (4–30) 
0.05–0.5 (2–15) 
0.1–0.5 (5–15) 
0.02–0.3 (1–10) 
 
1.5–5 (50–200) 
0.2–2 (10–100) 
1.5–15 (50–500) 
1.5–15 (50–500) 
1.5–15 (50–500) 
 
5–25 (250–1000) 
12–25 (500–1000) 
12–25 (500–1000) 
Investment 
Good 
1.5–3 (50–100) 
Sand casting 
Poor 
12–25 (500–1000) 
Metal forming: 
 
 
Cold rolling 
Good 
1–3 (25–125) 
Sheet metal draw 
Good 
1–3 (25–125) 
Cold extrusion 
Good 
1–4 (30–150) 
Hot rolling 
Poor 
12–25 (500–1000) 
Machining: 
 
 
Boring 
Good 
0.5–6 (15–250) 
Drilling 
Medium 
1.5–6 (60–250) 
Milling 
Good 
1–6 (30–250) 
Reaming 
Good 
1–3 (30–125) 
Shaping and planing 
Medium 
1.5–12 (60–500) 
Sawing 
Poor 
3–25 (100–1000) 
Turning 
Good 
0.5–6 (15–250) 
a Compiled from [1], [2], and other sources. 
b Roughness range values are given, mm (m-in). Roughness can vary significantly for a given process, depending on 
process parameters. 
 
 
 
of manufacturing processes and indicate the typical tolerances for 
each process. Toler- ances are based on the process capability for the 
particular manufacturing operation, as defined in Section 40.2. The 
tolerance that should be specified is a function of part size; larger 
parts require more generous tolerances. The table lists tolerances for 
moderately sized parts in each processing category. 
The manufacturing process determines surface finish and surface 
integrity. Some processes are capable of producing better 
surfaces than others. In general, process- ing cost increases 
with improvement in surface finish. This is because additional 
operations and more time are usually required to obtain increasingly 
better surfaces. Processes noted for providing superior finishes 
include honing, lapping, polishing, and superfinishing (Chapter 
24). Table 5.5 indicates the usual surface roughness that can be 
expected from various manufacturing processes. 
 
 
Metals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Part II covers the four types of engineering materials: 
(1) metals, (2) ceramics, (3) polymers, and (4) composites. 
Metals are the most important engineering materials and 
the topic of this chapter. A metal is a category of materi- 
als generally characterized by properties of ductility, mal- 
leability, luster, and high electrical and thermal conduc- 
tivity. The category includes both metallic elements and 
their alloys. Metals have properties that satisfy a wide 
variety of design requirements. The manufacturing proc- 
esses by which they are shaped into products have been 
developed and refined over many years; indeed, some of the 
processes date from ancient times (Historical Note 
1.2). In addition, the properties of metals can be en- 
hanced through heat treatment, covered in Chapter 26. 
The technological and commercial importance of 
metals derives from the following general properties 
possessed by virtually all of the common metals: 
➢ High stiffness and strength. Metals can be alloyed for 
high rigidity, strength, and hardness; thus, they are 
used to provide the structural framework for most 
engineered products. 
➢ Toughness. Metals have the capacity to absorb 
energy better than other classes of materials. 
➢ Good electrical conductivity. Metals are conduc- 
tors because of their metallic bonding that permits 
the free movement of electrons as charge carriers. 
➢ Good thermal conductivity. Metallic bonding also 
explains why metals generally conduct heat better 
than ceramics or polymers. 
6 
 
6.1
Alloys and Phase Diagrams 
6.1.1
 
6.1.2
 
6.2
Ferrous Metals 
6.2.1
 
6.2.2
 
6.2.3
 
6.2.4
 
6.3
Nonferrous Metals 
6.3.1
 
6.3.2 Magnesium and Its Alloys 
6.3.3
 
6.3.4
 
6.3.5
 
6.3.6
 
6.3.7
 
6.3.8
 
6.3.9
 
6.4
Superalloys 
118 
Section 6.1/Alloys and Phase Diagrams 
119 
 
 
In addition, certain metals have specific properties that make them attractive 
for specialized applications. Many common metals are available at relatively low 
cost per unit weight and are often the material of choice simply because of their 
low cost. 
Metals are converted into parts and products using a variety of manufacturing 
processes. The starting form of the metal differs, depending on the process. The 
major categories are (1) cast metal, in which the initial form is a casting; (2) wrought 
metal, in which the metal has been worked or can be worked (e.g., rolled or other- 
wise formed) after casting; better mechanical properties are generally associated 
with wrought metals compared with cast metals; and (3) powdered metal, in which 
the metal is purchased in the form of very small powders for conversion into parts 
using powder metallurgy techniques. Most metals are available in all three forms. 
The discussion in this chapter focuses on categories (1) and (2), which are of greatest 
commercial and engineering interest. Powder metallurgy techniques are examined 
in Chapter 15. 
Metals are classified into two major groups: (1) ferrous—those based on iron; 
and (2) nonferrous—all other metals. The ferrous group can be further subdivided 
into steels and cast irons. Most of the discussion in the present chapter is organized 
around this classification, but first the general topic of alloys and phase diagrams is 
introduced. 
 
Alloys and Phase Diagrams 
Although some metals are important as pure elements (e.g., gold, silver, copper), 
most engineering applications require the improved properties obtained by alloying. 
Through alloying, it is possible to enhance strength, hardness, and other properties 
compared with pure metals. This section defines and classifies alloys; it then discusses 
phase diagrams which indicate the phases of an alloy system as a function of compo- sition 
and temperature. 
 
 
6.1.1 ALLOYS 
 
An alloy is a metal composed of two or more elements, at least one of which is metal- lic. 
The two main categories of alloys are (1) solid solutions and (2) intermediate 
phases. 
 
Solid Solutions A solid solution is an alloy in which one element is dissolved in 
another to form a single-phase structure. The term phase describes any homogeneous mass 
of material, such as a metal in which the grains all have the same crystal lattice 
structure. In a solid solution, the solvent or base element is metallic, and the dissolved 
element can be either metallic or nonmetallic. Solid solutions come in two forms, 
shown in Figure 6.1. The first is a substitutional solid solution, in which atoms of 
the solvent element are replaced in its unit cell by the dissolved element. Brass is an 
example, in which zinc is dissolved in copper. To make the substitution, several rules must 
be satisfied ([3], [6], [7]): (1) the atomic radii of the two elements must be simi- lar, 
usually within 15%; (2) their lattice types must be the same; (3) if the elements have 
different valences, the lower valence metal is more likely to be the solvent; and 
(4) if the elements have high chemical affinity for each other, they are less likely to 
form a solid solution and more likely to form a compound. 
6. 
Section 6.1/Alloys and Phase Diagrams 
120 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.1  Two forms of solid solutions: 
(a) substitutional solid solution, and 
(b) interstitial solid solution. 
 
 
(a) 
(b) 
 
The second type of solid solution is an interstitial solid solution, in which atoms 
of the dissolving element fit into the vacant spaces between base metal atoms in 
the lattice structure. It follows that the atoms fitting into these interstices must be 
small compared with those of the solvent metal. The most important example of this 
second type is carbon dissolved in iron to form steel. 
In both forms of solid solution, the alloy structure is generally stronger and harder than 
either of the component elements. 
 
Intermediate Phases There are usually limits to the solubility of one element 
in another. When the amount of the dissolving element in the alloy exceeds the solid 
solubility limit of the base metal, a second phase forms in the alloy. The term inter- 
mediate phase is used to describe it because its chemical composition is intermediate 
between the two pure elements. Its crystalline structure is also different from those of 
the pure metals. Depending on composition, and recognizing that many alloys consist 
of more than two elements, these intermediate phases can be of several types, includ- 
ing (1) metallic compounds consisting of a metal and nonmetal such as Fe3C; and (2) 
intermetallic compounds—two metals that form a compound, such as Mg2Pb. The 
composition of the alloy is often such that the intermediate phase is mixed with the 
primary solid solution to form a two-phase structure, one phase dispersed throughout 
the second. These two-phase alloys are important because they can be formulated 
and heat-treated for significantly higher strength than solid solutions. 
 
 
6.1.2 
PHASE DIAGRAMS 
 
As the term is used in this text, a phase diagram is a graphical means of represent- 
ing the phases of a metal alloy system as a function of composition and temperature. 
Discussion of the diagram will be limited to alloy systems consisting of two elements 
at atmospheric pressures. This type of diagram is called a binary phase diagram. 
Other forms of phase diagrams are discussed in texts on materials science, such as [6]. 
 
The Copper–Nickel Alloy System The best way to introduce the phase dia- 
gram is by example. Figure 6.2 presents one of the simplest cases, the Cu–Ni alloy 
system. Composition is plotted on the horizontal axis and temperature on the verti- 
cal axis. Thus, any point in the diagram indicates the overall composition and the 
phase or phases present at the given temperature. Pure copper melts at 1083°C 
(1981°F), and pure nickel at 1455°C (2651°F). Alloy compositions between these 
extremes exhibit gradual melting that commences at the solidus and concludes at 
the liquidus as temperature is increased. 
The copper–nickel system is a solid solution alloy throughout its entire range 
of compositions. Anywhere in the region below the solidus line, the alloy is a solid 
Section 6.1/Alloys and Phase Diagrams 
121 
 
30 
0 
Liquid solution 
Liquid + solid 
 
 
28 
0 
Liquidus 
26 
1260°C 
 
L 
C 
S 
24 
0 
Solidus 
22 
20 
0 
 
1083°C 
 
26% 
Solid solution 
18 
36% 
62% 
 
 
 
 
00 
160 
00 
 
140 
00 
00 
 
120 
00 
 
00 
 
100 
00 
 
FIGURE 6.2 Phase 
diagram for the 
copper–nickel alloy 
system. 
 
 
0 
10 
20 
30 
40 
50 
60 
70 
80 
90 
100 
Cu 
% Nickel (Ni) 
Ni 
 
 
solution; there are no intermediate solid phases in this system. However, there is a 
mixture of phases in the region bounded by the solidus and liquidus. Recall from 
Section 4.1.3 that the solidus is the temperature at which the solid metal begins to 
melt as temperature is increased, and the liquidus is the temperature at which 
melting is completed. It can now be seen in the phase diagram that these tem- 
peratures vary with composition. Between the solidus and liquidus, the metal is a 
solid–liquid mix. 
 
Determining Chemical Compositions of Phases Although the overall 
composition of the alloy is given by its position along the horizontal axis, the com- 
positions of the liquid and solid phases are not the same. It is possible to determine 
these compositions from the phase diagram by drawing a horizontal line at the tem- 
perature of interest. The points of intersection between the horizontal line and the 
solidus and liquidus indicate the compositions of the solid and liquid phases present, 
respectively. Simply construct the vertical projections from the intersection points to 
the x-axis and read the corresponding compositions. 
 
 
Example 6.1 
Determining 
compositions 
from the phase 
diagram 
Analyze the compositions of the liquid and solid phases present in the copper- 
nickel system at an aggregate composition of 50% nickel and a temperature of 
1260°C (2300°F). 
Solution: A horizontal line is drawn at the given temperature level as shown 
in Figure 6.2. The line intersects the solidus at a composition of 62% nickel, 
thus indicating the composition of the solid phase. The intersection with the 
liquidus occurs at a composition of 36% Ni, corresponding to the analysis of 
the liquid phase. 
 
Temperature,°C 
Temperature,°F 
Section 6.1/Alloys and Phase Diagrams 
122 
 
 
As the temperature of the 50–50 Cu–Ni alloy is reduced, the solidus line is reached 
at about 1221°C (2230°F). Applying the same procedure used in the example, the 
composition of the solid metal is 50% nickel, and the composition of the last remain- 
ing liquid to freeze is about 26% nickel. How is it, the reader might ask, that the 
last ounce of molten metal has a composition so different from the solid metal into 
which it freezes? The answer is that the phase diagram assumes equilibrium condi- 
tions are allowed to prevail. In fact, the binary phase diagram is sometimes called an 
equilibrium diagram because of this assumption. What it means is that enough time 
is permitted for the solid metal to gradually change its composition by diffusion to 
achieve the composition indicated by the intersection point along the liquidus. In 
practice, when an alloy freezes (e.g., a casting), segregation occurs in the solid mass 
because of nonequilibrium conditions. The first liquid to solidify has a composition 
that is rich in the metal element with the higher melting point. Then as additional 
metal solidifies, its composition is different from that of the first metal to freeze. 
As the nucleation sites grow into a solid mass, compositions are distributed within 
the mass, depending on the temperature and time in the process at which freezing 
occurred. The overall composition is the average of the distribution. 
 
Determining Amounts of Each Phase The amounts of each phase present at 
a given temperature can also be determined from the phase diagram. This is done 
by the inverse lever rule: (1) using the same horizontal line as before that indicates 
the overall composition at a given temperature, measure the distances between the 
aggregate composition and the intersection points with the liquidus and solidus, 
identifying the distances as CL and CS, respectively (refer back to Figure 6.2); 
(2) the proportion of liquid phase present is given by 
L phase proportion =  
CS 
 
(CS + CL) 
(3) the proportion of solid phase present is given by 
S phase proportion =  
CL 
 
(CS + CL) 
 
(6.1) 
 
 
 
(6.2) 
 
Example 6.2 
Determining 
proportions of 
each phase 
Determine the proportions of liquid and solid phases for the 50% nickel 
composition of the copper–nickel system at the temperature of 1260°C 
(2300°F). 
Solution: Using the same horizontal line in Figure 6.2 as in previous 
Example 6.1, the distances CS and CL are measured as 10 mm and 12 mm, 
respectively. Thus the proportion of the liquid phase is 10/22 = 0.45 (45%), 
and the proportion of solid phase is 12/22 = 0.55 (55%). 
 
 
 
The proportions given by Eqs. (6.1) and (6.2) are by weight, same as the phase 
diagram percentages. Note that the proportions are based on the distance on the 
opposite side of the phase of interest; hence the name inverse lever rule. One can 
see the logic in this by taking the extreme case when, say, CS = 0; at that point, the 
proportion of the liquid phase is zero because the solidus has been reached and the 
alloy is therefore completely solidified. 
Section 6.1/Alloys and Phase Diagrams 
123 
 
Liquid 
α + L 
 
β 
β + L 
183°C 
61.9% Sn 
(362°F)
(eutectic composition) 
 
 
α + β 
 
The methods for determining chemical compositions of phases and the amounts of 
each phase are applicable to the solid region of the phase diagram as well as the 
liquidus–solidus region. Wherever there are regions in the phase diagram in which two 
phases are present, these methods can be used. When only one phase is present (in 
Figure 6.2, this is the entire solid region), the composition of the phase is its aggregate 
composition under equilibrium conditions; and the inverse lever rule does not apply 
because there is only one phase. 
 
The Tin–Lead Alloy System A more complicated phase diagram is the Sn–Pb 
system, shown in Figure 6.3. Tin–lead alloys have traditionally been used as solders 
for making electrical and mechanical connections (Section 30.2).1 The phase dia- 
gram exhibits several features not included in the previous Cu–Ni system. One fea- 
ture is the presence of two solid phases, alpha (a) and beta (b). The a phase is a solid 
solution of tin in lead at the left side of the diagram, and the b phase is a solid solu- 
tion of lead in tin that occurs only at elevated temperatures around 200°C (375°F) 
at the right side of the diagram. Between these solid solutions lies a mixture of the 
two solid phases, a + b. 
Another feature of interest in the tin–lead system is how melting differs for dif- 
ferent compositions. Pure tin melts at 232°C (449°F), and pure lead melts at 327°C 
(621°F). Alloys of these elements melt at lower temperatures. The diagram shows two 
liquidus lines that begin at the melting points of the pure metals and meet at a 
composition of 61.9% Sn. This is the eutectic composition for the tin–lead system. In 
general, a eutectic alloy is a particular composition in an alloy system for which 
the solidus and liquidus are at the same temperature. The correspond- ing eutectic 
temperature, the melting point of the eutectic composition, is 183°C (362°F) in the 
present case. The eutectic temperature is always the lowest melt- ing point for an 
alloy system (eutectic is derived from the Greek word eutektos, meaning easily 
melted). 
 
 
 
 
300 
 
 
 
200 
 
 
 
100 
600 
 
500 
 
400 
 
300 
 
200 
 
100 
 
FIGURE 6.3 Phase 
diagram for the tin–lead 
alloy system. 
0 
0 
20 
40 
60 
80 
Pb 
% Tin (Sn) 
Sn 
 
 
1Because lead is a poisonous substance, alternative alloying elements have been substituted for lead in 
many commercial solders. These are called lead-free solders. 
Temperature °C 
Temperature °F 
Section 6.1/Alloys and Phase Diagrams 
124 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 Basic data on the metallic elements: (a) iron. 
 
Symbol: 
Fe 
Atomic number: 
26 
Specific gravity: 
7.87 
Crystal structure: 
BCC 
Melting temperature: 
1539°C (2802°F) 
Elastic modulus: 
209,000 MPa (30 X 106 lb/in2) 
Principal ore: 
Hematite (Fe2O3) 
Alloying elements: 
Carbon; also chromium, manganese, nickel, molybdenum, vanadium, and silicon. 
Typical applications: 
Construction, machinery, automotive, railway tracks and equipment. 
Compiled from [6], [11], [12], and other references. 
 
Methods for determining the chemical analysis of the phases and the proportions 
of phases present can be readily applied to the Sn–Pb system just as it was used in 
the Cu–Ni system. In fact, these methods are applicable in any region containing 
two phases, including two solid phases. Most alloy systems are characterized by the 
existence of multiple solid phases and eutectic compositions, and so the phase dia- 
grams of these systems are often similar to the tin–lead diagram. Of course, many 
alloy systems are considerably more complex, for example, the iron-carbon system, 
considered next. 
 
Ferrous Metals 
The ferrous metals are based on iron, one of the oldest metals known to humans 
(Historical Note 6.1). The properties and other data relating to iron are listed in 
Table 6.1(a). The ferrous metals of engineering importance are alloys of iron and 
carbon. These alloys divide into two major groups: steel and cast iron. Together, they 
constitute approximately 85% of the metal tonnage in the United States [6]. The 
discussion of ferrous metals begins with the iron–carbon phase diagram. 
 
6.2 
Historical Note 6.1 
Iron and steel 
Iron was discovered sometime during the Bronze 
was harder than bronze and that it took a sharper, 
Age. It was probably uncovered from ashes of fires 
stronger edge. 
built near iron ore deposits. Use of the metal grew, 
 
During the Middle Ages in Europe, the invention 
finally surpassing bronze in importance. The Iron Age 
of the cannon created the first real demand for iron; 
is usually dated from about 1200 B.C.E, although ar- only then did it finally exceed copper and bronze in 
tifacts made of iron have been found in the Great 
usage. Also, the cast iron stove, the appliance of the 
Pyramid of Giza in Egypt, which dates to 2900 B.C.E. 
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries, significantly 
Iron-smelting furnaces have been discovered in Israel 
increased demand for iron (Historical Note 11.3). 
dating to 1300 B.C.E. Iron chariots, swords, and tools 
 
In the nineteenth century, industries such as rail- 
were made in ancient Assyria (northern Iraq) around 
roads, shipbuilding, construction, machinery, and the 
1000 B.C.E. The Romans inherited ironworking from 
military created a dramatic growth in the demand 
their provinces, mainly Greece, and they developed 
for iron and steel in Europe and America. Although 
the technology to new heights, spreading it through- 
large quantities of (crude) pig iron could be pro- 
out Europe. The ancient civilizations learned that iron 
duced by blast furnaces, the subsequent processes 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
125 
 
 
 
 
 
6.2.1 THE IRON–CARBON PHASE DIAGRAM 
 
The iron–carbon phase diagram is shown in Figure 6.4. Pure iron melts at 1539°C 
(2802°F). During the rise in temperature from ambient, it undergoes several solid 
phase transformations as indicated in the diagram. Starting at room temperature the 
phase is alpha (a), also called ferrite. At 912°C (1674°F), ferrite transforms to 
gamma (g), called austenite. This, in turn, transforms at 1394°C (2541°F) to delta (d), 
which remains until melting occurs. The three phases are distinct; alpha and delta 
have BCC lattice structures (Section 2.3.1), and between them, gamma is FCC. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.4 Phase 
diagram for iron–carbon 
system, up to about 6% 
carbon. 
 
0 
1 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 
Fe 
C 
% Carbon (C) 
for producing wrought iron and steel were slow. The  When electricity became available in abundance necessity 
to improve productivity of these vital met-  in the late 1800s, this energy source was used for als was the 
“mother of invention.” Henry Bessemer  steelmaking. The first commercial electric furnace for in England 
developed the process of blowing air up production of steel was operated in France in 1899. through the molten 
iron that led to the Bessemer By 1920, this had become the principal process for converter (patented in 1856). 
Pierre and Emile Mar-  making alloy steels. 
tin in France built the first open hearth furnace in 
 
The use of pure oxygen in steelmaking was initiated 
1864. These methods permitted up to 15 tons of  
just before World War II in several European countries 
steel to be produced in a single batch (heat), a sub- 
and the United States. Work in Austria after the war cul- 
stantial increase from previous methods. 
 
minated in the development of the basic oxygen fur- 
In the United States, expansion of the railroads 
nace (BOF). This has become the leading modern tech- 
after the Civil War created a huge demand for steel. 
 
nology for producing steel, surpassing the open hearth 
In the 1880s and 1890s, steel beams were first used  
method around 1970. The Bessemer converter had been 
in significant quantities in construction. Skyscrapers  
surpassed by the open hearth method around 1920 and 
came to rely on these steel frames. 
 
ceased to be a commercial steelmaking process in 1971. 
1800 
Liquid (L) 
3200 
δ 
2800 
1400 
2400 
 
γ + L 
1000 
 
α + γ 
L + Fe3C 
 (2066°F) 
2000 
600 
γ + Fe3C Solid 
 
1600 
A 1 
1200 
α + Fe3C 
Solid 
800 
200 
400 
Temperature, °C 
Temperature, °F 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
126 
 
 
Iron as a commercial product is available at various levels of purity. Electrolytic 
iron is the most pure, at about 99.99%, for research and other purposes where the 
pure metal is required. Ingot iron, containing about 0.1% impurities (including 
about 0.01% carbon), is used in applications in which high ductility or corrosion 
resistance are needed. Wrought iron contains about 3% slag but very little carbon, 
and is easily shaped in hot forming operations such as forging. 
Solubility limits of carbon in iron are low in the ferrite phase—only about 0.022% 
at 723°C (1333°F). Austenite can dissolve up to about 2.1% carbon at a temperature 
of 1130°C (2066°F). This difference in solubility between alpha and gamma leads 
to opportunities for strengthening by heat treatment, but leave that for Chapter 26. 
Even without heat treatment, the strength of iron increases dramatically as carbon 
content increases, and the metal is called steel. More precisely, steel is defined as an 
iron–carbon alloy containing from 0.02% to 2.11% carbon.2 Of course, steels can 
also contain other alloying elements as well. 
The diagram indicates a eutectic composition at 4.3% carbon. There is a similar 
feature in the solid region of the diagram at 0.77% carbon and 723°C (1333°F). 
This is called the eutectoid composition. Steels below this carbon level are known 
as hypoeutectoid steels, and above this carbon level, from 0.77% to 2.1%, they are 
called hypereutectoid steels. 
In addition to the phases mentioned, one other phase is prominent in the iron– 
carbon alloy system. This is Fe3C, also known as cementite, an intermediate phase. 
It is a metallic compound of iron and carbon that is hard and brittle. At room tem- 
perature under equilibrium conditions, iron–carbon alloys form a two-phase system 
at carbon levels even slightly above zero. The carbon content in steel ranges between these 
very low levels and about 2.1% C. Above 2.1% C, up to about 4% or 5%, the alloy 
is defined as cast iron. 
 
 
6.2.2 
IRON AND STEEL PRODUCTION 
 
Coverage of iron and steel production begins with the iron ores and other raw mate- 
rials required. Iron-making is then discussed, in which iron is reduced from the ores, 
and steelmaking, in which the iron is refined to obtain the desired purity and com- 
position (alloying) of steel. The casting processes accomplished at the steel mill are 
then considered. 
 
Iron Ores and Other Raw Materials The principal ore used in the production 
of iron and steel is hematite (Fe2O3). Other iron ores include magnetite (Fe3O4), 
siderite (FeCO3), and limonite (Fe2O3-xH2O, in which x is typically around 1.5). Iron ores 
contain from 50% to around 70% iron, depending on grade (hematite is almost 70% 
iron). In addition, scrap iron and steel are widely used today as raw materials in 
iron- and steelmaking. 
Other raw materials needed to reduce iron from the ores are coke and limestone. 
Coke is a high carbon fuel produced by heating bituminous coal in a limited oxy- 
gen atmosphere for several hours, followed by water spraying in special quench- 
ing towers. Coke serves two functions in the reduction process: (1) it is a fuel that 
 
2 This is the conventional definition of steel, but exceptions exist. A recently developed steel for sheet 
metal forming, called interstitial-free steel, has a carbon content of only 0.005%. It is discussed in 
Section 6.2.3. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
127 
 
 
supplies heat for the chemical reactions; and (2) it produces carbon monoxide (CO) 
to reduce the iron ore. Limestone is a rock containing high proportions of calcium 
carbonate (CaCO3). The limestone is used in the process as a flux to react with and 
remove impurities in the molten iron as slag. 
 
Iron-making To produce iron, a charge of ore, coke, and limestone are dropped into 
the top of a blast furnace. A blast furnace is a refractory-lined chamber with a diameter 
of about 9 to 11 m (30–35 ft) at its widest and a height of 40 m (125 ft), in which hot 
gases are forced into the lower part of the chamber at high rates to accom- plish 
combustion and reduction of the iron. A typical blast furnace and some of its technical 
details are illustrated in Figures 6.5 and 6.6. The charge slowly descends from the top 
of the furnace toward the base and is heated to temperatures around 1650°C (3000°F). 
Burning of the coke is accomplished by the hot gases (CO, H2, CO2, H2O, N2, O2, and 
fuels) as they pass upward through the layers of charge material. The carbon monoxide 
is supplied as hot gas, and it is also formed from combustion of coke. The CO gas has 
a reducing effect on the iron ore; the reaction (simplified) can be written as follows 
(using hematite as the starting ore): 
 
Fe2O3 + CO → 2FeO + CO2 
(6.3a) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.5 Cross 
section of ironmaking 
blast furnace showing 
major components. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
128 
 
 
Iron ore, 
coke, and 
limestone 
 
 
Gas to cleaning and reheating 
 
Typical temperature profile 
 
200°C (400°F) 
 
 
800°C (1500°F) 
 
 
Direction of motion of charge material 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.6 
Schematic diagram 
indicating details of the 
blast furnace operation. 
1100°C (2000°F) 
 
1400°C (2500°F) 
1650°C (3000°F) 
Slag 
Direction of motion of hot gases 
 
 
Hot blast air 
Molten pig iron 
Carbon dioxide reacts with coke to form more carbon monoxide: 
CO2 + C (coke) → 2CO 
(6.3b) 
 
which then accomplishes the final reduction of FeO to iron: 
FeO + CO → Fe + CO2 
(6.3c) 
 
The molten iron drips downward, collecting at the base of the blast furnace. This is 
periodically tapped into hot iron ladle cars for transfer to subsequent steelmaking 
operations. 
The role played by limestone can be summarized as follows. First the limestone is 
reduced to lime (CaO) by heating, as follows: 
CaCO3 → CaO + CO2 
(6.4) 
 
The lime combines with impurities such as silica (SiO2), sulfur (S), and alumina 
(Al2O3) in reactions that produce a molten slag that floats on top of the iron. 
It is instructive to note that approximately 7 tons of raw materials are required 
to produce 1 ton of iron. The ingredients are proportioned about as follows: 2.0 tons 
of iron ore, 1.0 ton of coke, 0.5 ton of limestone, and (here’s the amazing statistic) 
3.5 tons of gases. A significant proportion of the byproducts are recycled. 
The iron tapped from the base of the blast furnace (called pig iron) contains 
more than 4% C, plus other impurities: 0.3–1.3% Si, 0.5–2.0% Mn, 0.1–1.0% P, and 
0.02–0.08% S [11]. Further refinement of the metal is required for both cast iron and 
steel. A furnace called a cupola (Section 11.4.1) is commonly used for converting pig 
iron into gray cast iron. For steel, compositions must be more closely controlled and 
impurities brought to much lower levels. 
Steelmaking Since the mid–1800s, a number of processes have been developed 
for refining pig iron into steel. Today, the two most important processes are the basic 
oxygen furnace (BOF) and the electric furnace. Both are used to produce carbon 
and alloy steels. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
129 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.7 Basic 
oxygen furnace 
showing BOF vessel 
during processing of a 
heat. 
 
 
The basic oxygen furnace accounts for about 70% of U.S. steel production. The 
BOF is an adaptation of the Bessemer converter. Whereas the Bessemer process 
used air blown up through the molten pig iron to burn off impurities, the basic oxy- 
gen process uses pure oxygen. A diagram of the conventional BOF during the mid- 
dle of a heat is illustrated in Figure 6.7. The typical BOF vessel is about 5 m (16 ft) 
inside diameter and can process 150 to 200 tons in a heat. 
The BOF steelmaking sequence is shown in Figure 6.8. Integrated steel mills 
transfer the molten pig iron from the blast furnace to the BOF in railway cars called 
hot-iron ladle cars. In modern practice, steel scrap is added to the pig iron, account- 
ing for about 30% of a typical BOF charge. Lime (CaO) is also added. After charg- 
ing, the lance is inserted into the vessel so that its tip is about 1.5 m (5 ft) above 
the surface of the molten iron. Pure O2 is blown at high velocity through the lance, 
causing combustion and heating at the surface of the molten pool. Carbon dissolved 
in the iron and other impurities such as silicon, manganese, and phosphorus are oxi- 
dized. The reactions are 
 
2C + O2 → 2CO (CO2 is also produced) 
 (6.5a) 
Si + O2 → SiO2 
(6.5b) 
2Mn + O2 → 2MnO 
(6.5c) 
4P + 5O2 → 2P2O5 
(6.5d) 
 
The CO and CO2 gases produced in the first reaction escape through the mouth of 
the BOF vessel and are collected by the fume hood; the products of the other three 
reactions are removed as slag, using the lime as a fluxing agent. The C content 
in the iron decreases almost linearly with time during the process, thus permit- ting 
fairly predictable control over carbon levels in the steel. After refining to the 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
130 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.8  BOF sequence during processing cycle: (1) charging of scrap and (2) pig iron; (3) blowing (Figure 6.7); 
(4) tapping the molten steel; and (5) pouring off the slag. 
 
 
desired level, the molten steel is tapped; alloying ingredients and other additives 
are poured into the heat; then the slag is poured. A 200-ton heat of steel can be 
processed in about 20 min, although the entire cycle time (tap-to-tap time) takes 
about 45 min. 
Recent advances in the technology of the basic oxygen process include the use of 
nozzles in the bottom of the vessel through which oxygen is injected into the molten iron. 
This allows better mixing than the conventional BOF lance, resulting in shorter processing 
times (a reduction of about 3 min), lower carbon contents, and higher yields. 
The electric arc furnace accounts for about 30% of U.S. steel production. Although 
pig iron was originally used as the charge in this type of furnace, scrap iron and 
scrap steel are the primary raw materials today. Electric arc furnaces are available in 
several designs; the direct arc type shown in Figure 6.9 is currently the most 
economical type. These furnaces have removable roofs for charging from above; 
tapping is accomplished by tilting the entire furnace. Scrap iron and steel selected for 
their compositions, together with alloying ingredients and limestone (flux), are charged 
into the furnace and heated by an electric arc that flows between large electrodes and 
the charge metal. Complete melting requires about 2 hours; tap-to-tap time is 4 
hours. Capacities of electric furnaces commonly range between 25 and 100 tons per 
heat. Electric arc furnaces are noted for better quality steel but higher cost per ton, 
compared with the BOF. The electric arc furnace is generally associated with 
production of alloy steels, tool steels, and stainless steels. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
131 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.9 Electric 
arc furnace for 
steelmaking. 
 
 
Casting of Ingots Steels produced by BOF or electric furnace are solidified for 
subsequent processing either as cast ingots or by continuous casting. Steel ingots 
are large discrete castings weighing from less than 1 ton up to around 300 tons (the 
weight of an entire heat). Ingot molds are made of high carbon iron and are tapered 
at the top or bottom for removal of the solid casting. A big-end-down mold is illus- 
trated in Figure 6.10. The cross section may be square, rectangular, or round, and the 
perimeter is usually corrugated to increase surface area for faster cooling. The mold 
is placed on a platform called a stool; after solidification the mold is lifted, leaving 
the casting on the stool. 
The solidification process for ingots as well as other castings is described in 
Chapter 10 on casting fundamentals. Because ingots are such large castings, the 
time required for solidification and the associated shrinkage are significant. Porosity 
caused by the reaction of carbon and oxygen to form CO during cooling and solidi- 
fication is a problem that must be addressed in ingot casting. These gases are lib- 
erated from the molten steel because of their reduced solubility with decreasing 
temperature. Cast steels are often treated to limit or prevent CO gas evolution 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.10 A big-end-down ingot mold 
typical of type used in steelmaking. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
132 
 
 
during solidification. The treatment involves adding elements such as Si and Al that 
react with the oxygen dissolved in the molten steel, so it is not available for CO 
reaction. The structure of the solid steel is thus free of pores and other defects 
caused by gas formation. 
 
Continuous Casting Continuous casting is widely applied in aluminum and cop- 
per production, but its most noteworthy application is in steelmaking. The process is 
replacing ingot casting because it dramatically increases productivity. Ingot casting 
is a discrete process. Because the molds are relatively large, solidification time is sig- 
nificant. For a large steel ingot, it may take 10 to 12 hours for the casting to solidify. 
The use of continuous casting reduces solidification time by an order of magnitude. 
The continuous casting process, also called strand casting, is illustrated in 
Figure 6.11. Molten steel is poured from a ladle into a temporary container called 
a tundish, which dispenses the metal to one or more continuous casting molds. The 
steel begins to solidify at the outer regions as it travels down through the water- 
cooled mold. Water sprays accelerate the cooling process. While still hot and plastic, 
the metal is bent from vertical to horizontal orientation. It is then cut into sections 
or fed continuously into a rolling mill (Section 18.1) in which it is formed into plate 
or sheet stock or other cross sections. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.11 
Continuous casting; 
steel is poured into 
tundish and distributed 
to a water-cooled 
continuous casting 
mold; it solidifies as it 
travels down through 
the mold. Thickness of 
slab is exaggerated for 
clarity. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
133 
 
80 
~ 
 
6.2.3 
STEELS 
 
As defined earlier, Steel is an alloy of iron that contains carbon ranging by weight 
between 0.02% and 2.11% (most steels range between 0.05% and 1.1% C). It often 
includes other alloying ingredients, such as manganese, chromium, nickel, and/or 
molybdenum; but it is the carbon content that turns iron into steel. Hundreds of 
compositions of steel are available commercially. For purposes of organization here, 
the vast majority of commercially important steels can be grouped into the follow- 
ing categories: (1) plain carbon steels, (2) low alloy steels, (3) stainless steels, (4) tool 
steels, and (5) specialty steels. 
 
Plain Carbon Steels These steels contain carbon as the principal alloying 
element, with only small amounts of other elements (about 0.4% manganese plus 
lesser amounts of silicon, phosphorus, and sulfur). The strength of plain carbon 
steels increases with carbon content. A typical plot of the relationship is illustrated 
in Figure 6.12. As seen in the phase diagram for iron and carbon (Figure 6.4), steel 
at room temperature is a mixture of ferrite (a) and cementite (Fe3C). The cementite 
particles distributed throughout the ferrite act as obstacles to the movement of dis- 
locations during slip (Section 2.3.3); more carbon leads to more barriers, and more 
barriers mean stronger and harder steel. 
According to a designation scheme developed by the American Iron and Steel 
Institute (AISI) and the Society of Automotive Engineers (SAE), plain carbon 
steels are specified by a four-digit number system: 10XX, where 10 indicates that 
the steel is plain carbon, and XX indicates the percent of carbon in hundredths of 
percentage points. For example, 1020 steel contains 0.20% C. The plain carbon steels 
are typically classified into three groups according to their carbon content: 
 
1. Low carbon steels contain less than 0.20% C and are by far the most widely 
used steels. Typical applications are automobile sheet-metal parts, plate steel 
for fabrication, and railroad rails. These steels are relatively easy to form, which 
accounts for their popularity where high strength is not required. Steel castings 
usually fall into this carbon range, also. 
 
 
 
240 
 
220 
 
200 
 
160 
 
800 
 
 
600 
 
 
400 
120 
 
100 
 
80 
 
60 
 
 
FIGURE 6.12 Tensile 
strength and hardness 
as a function of carbon 
content in plain 
carbon steel (hot-rolled, 
120  
 
200 
 
 
 
0 
0.2 
0.4 
0.6 
40 
 
20 
 
 
0.8 
1.0 
unheat-treated). 
% Carbon (C) 
Tensile 
strength 
Hardness 
Hardness, HB 
Tensile strength, MPa 
Tensile strength, 1000 lb/in2. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
134 
 
 
2. Medium carbon steels range in carbon between 0.20% and 0.50% and are 
specified for applications requiring higher strength than the low-C steels. 
Applications include machinery components and engine parts such as crank- 
shafts and connecting rods. 
3. High carbon steels contain carbon in amounts greater than 0.50%. They are 
specified for still higher strength applications and where stiffness and hard- 
ness are needed. Springs, cutting tools and blades, and wear-resistant parts are 
examples. 
Increasing carbon content strengthens and hardens the steel, but its ductility is 
reduced. Also, high carbon steels can be heat treated to form martensite, making the 
steel very hard and strong (Section 26.2). 
 
Low Alloy Steels Low alloy steels are iron–carbon alloys that contain additional 
alloying elements in amounts totaling less than about 5% by weight. Owing to these 
additions, low alloy steels have mechanical properties that are superior to those of 
the plain carbon steels for given applications. Superior properties usually mean 
higher strength, hardness, hot hardness, wear resistance, toughness, and more desir- 
able combinations of these properties. Heat treatment is often required to achieve 
these improved properties. 
Common alloying elements added to steel are chromium, manganese, molyb- 
denum, nickel, and vanadium, sometimes individually but usually in combi- 
nations. These elements typically form solid solutions with iron and metallic 
compounds with carbon (carbides), assuming sufficient carbon is present to sup- 
port a reaction. The effects of the principal alloying ingredients can be summa- 
rized as follows: 
➢ Chromium (Cr) improves strength, hardness, wear resistance, and hot hardness. 
It is one of the most effective alloying ingredients for increasing hardenability 
(Section 26.2.3). In significant proportions, Cr improves corrosion resistance. 
➢ Manganese (Mn) improves the strength and hardness of steel. When the steel 
is heat treated, hardenability is improved with increased manganese. Because of these 
benefits, manganese is a widely used alloying ingredient in steel. 
➢ Molybdenum (Mo) increases toughness and hot hardness. It also improves 
hardenability and forms carbides for wear resistance. 
➢ Nickel (Ni) improves strength and toughness. It increases hardenability but not 
as much as some of the other alloying elements in steel. In significant amounts 
it improves corrosion resistance and is the other major ingredient (besides 
chromium) in certain types of stainless steel. 
➢ Vanadium (V) inhibits grain growth during elevated temperature processing 
and heat treatment, which enhances strength and toughness of steel. It also 
forms carbides that increase wear resistance. 
The AISI-SAE designations of many of the low alloy steels are presented in 
Table 6.2, which indicates nominal chemical analysis. As before, carbon content is 
specified by XX in 1/100% of carbon. For completeness, plain carbon steels (10XX) 
are included. To obtain an idea of the properties possessed by some of these steels, 
Table 6.3 lists the treatment to which the steel is subjected for strengthening and its 
strength and ductility. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
135 
 
 
 TABLE • 6.2 AISI-SAE designations of steels. 
 
 
 
Nominal Chemical Analysis, % 
Code 
Name of Steel 
Cr 
Mn 
Mo 
Ni 
V 
P 
S 
Si 
10XX 
Plain carbon 
 
0.4 
 
 
 
0.04 
0.05 
 
11XX 
Resulfurized 
 
0.9 
 
 
 
0.01 
0.12 
0.01 
12XX 
Resulfurized, rephosphorized 
 
0.9 
 
 
 
0.10 
0.22 
0.01 
13XX 
Manganese 
 
1.7 
 
 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
20XX 
Nickel steels 
 
0.5 
 
0.6 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.2 
31XX 
Nickel–chrome 
0.6 
 
 
1.2 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
40XX 
Molybdenum 
 
0.8 
0.25 
 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.2 
41XX 
Chrome–molybdenum 
1.0 
0.8 
0.2 
 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
43XX 
Ni–Cr–Mo 
0.8 
0.7 
0.25 
1.8 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.2 
46XX 
Nickel–molybdenum 
 
0.6 
0.25 
1.8 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
47XX 
Ni–Cr–Mo 
0.4 
0.6 
0.2 
1.0 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
48XX 
Nickel–molybdenum 
 
0.6 
0.25 
3.5 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
50XX 
Chromium 
0.5 
0.4 
 
 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
52XX 
Chromium 
1.4 
0.4 
 
 
 
0.02 
0.02 
0.3 
61XX 
Cr–Vanadium 
0.8 
0.8 
 
 
0.1 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
81XX 
Ni–Cr–Mo 
0.4 
0.8 
0.1 
0.3 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
86XX 
Ni–Cr–Mo 
0.5 
0.8 
0.2 
0.5 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
88XX 
Ni–Cr–Mo 
0.5 
0.8 
0.35 
0.5 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
92XX 
Silicon–Manganese 
 
0.8 
 
 
 
0.04 
0.04 
2.0 
93XX 
Ni–Cr–Mo 
1.2 
0.6 
0.1 
3.2 
 
0.02 
0.02 
0.3 
98XX 
Ni–Cr–Mo 
0.8 
0.8 
0.25 
1.0 
 
0.04 
0.04 
0.3 
Source: [11]. 
 
 
Low alloy steels are not easily welded, especially at medium and high carbon 
levels. Since the 1960s, research has been directed at developing low carbon, low 
alloy steels that have better strength-to-weight ratios than plain carbon steels but 
are more weldable than low alloy steels. The products developed out of these efforts 
are called high-strength low-alloy (HSLA) steels. They generally have low carbon 
contents (in the range 0.10% to 0.30% C) plus relatively small amounts of alloy- 
ing ingredients (usually only about 3% total of elements such as Mn, Cu, Ni, and 
Cr). HSLA steels are hot-rolled under controlled conditions designed to provide 
improved strength compared with plain C steels, yet with no sacrifice in formability 
or weldability. Strengthening is by solid solution alloying; heat treatment is not fea- 
sible because of low carbon content. Table 6.3 lists one HSLA steel, together with 
properties (chemistry is: 0.12 C, 0.60 Mn, 1.1 Ni, 1.1 Cr, 0.35 Mo, and 0.4 Si). 
 
Stainless Steels Stainless steels are a group of highly alloyed steels designed to 
provide high corrosion resistance. The principal alloying element in stainless steel 
is chromium, usually above 15%. The chromium in the alloy forms a thin, impervi- 
ous oxide film in an oxidizing atmosphere, which protects the surface from corro- 
sion. Nickel is another alloying ingredient used in certain stainless steels to increase 
corrosion protection. Carbon is used to strengthen and harden the metal; however, 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
136 
 
 
 TABLE • 6.3 Treatments and mechanical properties of selected steels. 
 
 
 
Tensile Strength 
Code 
Treatmenta 
MPa 
lb/in2 
Elongation, % 
1010 
HR 
304 
44,000 
47 
1010 
CD 
366 
53,000 
12 
1020 
HR 
380 
55,000 
28 
1020 
CD 
421 
61,000 
15 
1040 
HR 
517 
75,000 
20 
1040 
CD 
587 
85,000 
10 
1055 
HT 
897 
130,000 
16 
1315 
None 
545 
79,000 
34 
2030 
None 
566 
82,000 
32 
3130 
HT 
697 
101,000 
28 
4130 
HT 
890 
129,000 
17 
4140 
HT 
918 
133,000 
16 
4340 
HT 
1279 
185,000 
12 
4815 
HT 
635 
92,000 
27 
9260 
HT 
994 
144,000 
18 
HSLA 
None 
586 
85,000 
20 
Compiled from [6], [11], and other sources. 
aHR = hot-rolled; CD = cold-drawn; HT = heat treatment involving heating and quenching, 
followed by tempering to produce tempered martensite (Section 26.2). 
 
 
increasing the carbon content has the effect of reducing corrosion protection because 
chromium carbide forms to reduce the amount of free Cr available in the alloy. 
In addition to corrosion resistance, stainless steels are noted for their combina- 
tion of strength and ductility. Although these properties are desirable in many appli- 
cations, they generally make these alloys difficult to work in manufacturing. Also, 
stainless steels are significantly more expensive than plain C or low alloy steels. 
Stainless steels are traditionally divided into three groups, named for the pre- 
dominant phase present in the alloy at ambient temperature: 
1. Austenitic stainless steels have a typical composition of around 18% Cr and 8% 
Ni and are the most corrosion resistant of the three groups. Owing to this com- 
position, they are sometimes identified as 18-8 stainless. They are nonmagnetic 
and very ductile; but they show significant work hardening. The nickel has the 
effect of enlarging the austenite region in the iron–carbon phase diagram, mak- 
ing it stable at room temperature. Austenitic stainless steels are used to fabricate 
chemical and food processing equipment, as well as machinery parts requiring 
high corrosion resistance. 
2. Ferritic stainless steels have around 15% to 20% chromium, low carbon, and 
no nickel. This provides a ferrite phase at room temperature. Ferritic stain- less 
steels are magnetic and are less ductile and corrosion resistant than the 
austenitics. Parts made of ferritic stainless range from kitchen utensils to jet 
engine components. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
137 
 
 
 TABLE • 6.4 Compositions and mechanical properties of selected stainless steels. 
 
 
 
Chemical Analysis, % 
 
Tensile Strength 
Type 
Fe 
Cr 
Ni 
C 
Mn 
Othera 
MPa 
lb/in2 
Elongation, % 
Austenitic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
301 
73 
17 
7 
0.15 
2 
 
620 
90,000 
40 
302 
71 
18 
8 
0.15 
2 
 
515 
75,000 
40 
304 
69 
19 
9 
0.08 
2 
 
515 
75,000 
40 
309 
61 
23 
13 
0.20 
2 
 
515 
75,000 
40 
316 
65 
17 
12 
0.08 
2 
2.5 Mo 
515 
75,000 
40 
Ferritic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
405 
85 
13 
— 
0.08 
1 
 
415 
60,000 
20 
430 
81 
17 
— 
0.12 
1 
 
415 
60,000 
20 
Martensitic 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
403 
86 
12 
— 
0.15 
1 
 
485 
70,000 
20 
403b 
86 
12 
— 
0.15 
1 
 
825 
120,000 
12 
416 
85 
13 
— 
0.15 
1 
 
485 
70,000 
20 
416b 
85 
13 
— 
0.15 
1 
 
965 
140,000 
10 
440 
81 
17 
— 
0.65 
1 
 
725 
105,000 
20 
440b 
81 
17 
— 
0.65 
1 
 
1790 
260,000 
5 
Compiled from [11]. 
aAll of the grades in the table contain about 1% (or less) Si plus small amounts (well below 1%) of phosphorus, sulfur, and other 
elements such as aluminum. 
bHeat treated. 
 
3. Martensitic stainless steels have a higher carbon content than ferritic stainlesses, thus 
permitting them to be strengthened by heat treatment (Section 26.2). They have 
as much as 18% Cr but no Ni. They are strong, hard, and fatigue resistant, but 
not generally as corrosion resistant as the other two groups. Typical products include 
cutlery and surgical instruments. 
 
Most stainless steels are designated by a three-digit AISI numbering scheme. The 
first digit indicates the general type, and the last two digits give the specific grade 
within the type. Table 6.4 lists the common stainless steels with typical compositions 
and mechanical properties. The traditional stainless steels were developed in the early 
1900s. Since then, several additional high alloy steels have been developed that have 
good corrosion resistance and other desirable properties. These are also classi- fied as 
stainless steels. Continuing the list: 
 
4. Precipitation hardening stainless steels, which have a typical composition of 
17% Cr and 7% Ni, with additional small amounts of alloying elements such 
as aluminum, copper, titanium, and molybdenum. Their distinguishing feature 
among stainlesses is that they can be strengthened by precipitation hardening 
(Section 26.3). Strength and corrosion resistance are maintained at elevated 
temperatures, which suits these alloys to aerospace applications. 
5. Duplex stainless steels possess a structure that is a mixture of austenite and 
ferrite in roughly equal amounts. Their corrosion resistance is similar to the 
austenitic grades, and they show improved resistance to stress-corrosion crack- 
ing. Applications include heat exchangers, pumps, and wastewater treatment 
plants. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
138 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.5 Tool steels by AISI prefix identification, with examples of composition and typical hardness values. 
 
 
AISI 
 
Example 
 
C 
 
Cr 
Chemical Analysis, %a 
Mn 
Mo 
Ni 
 
V 
 
W 
Hardness, 
HRC 
T 
T1 
0.7 
4.0 
 
1.0 
18.0 
65 
M 
M2 
0.8 
4.0 
5.0 
2.0 
6.0 
65 
H 
H11 
0.4 
5.0 
1.5 
0.4 
 
55 
D 
D1 
1.0 
12.0 
1.0 
 
 
60 
A 
A2 
1.0 
5.0 
1.0 
 
 
60 
O 
O1 
0.9 
0.5 
1.0 
 
0.5 
61 
W 
W1 
1.0 
 
 
 
 
63 
S 
S1 
0.5 
1.5 
 
 
2.5 
50 
P 
P20 
0.4 
1.7 
0.4 
 
 
40b 
L 
L6 
0.7 
0.8 
0.2 
1.5 
 
 
45b 
aPercent composition rounded to nearest tenth. 
bHardness estimated. 
 
 
Tool Steels  Tool steels are a class of (usually) highly alloyed steels designed for use 
as industrial cutting tools, dies, and molds. To perform in these applications, they must 
possess high strength, hardness, hot hardness, wear resistance, and toughness under 
impact. To obtain these properties, tool steels are heat treated. Principal reasons for 
the high levels of alloying elements are (1) improved hardenability, (2) reduced 
distortion during heat treatment, (3) hot hardness, (4) formation of hard metallic 
carbides for abrasion resistance, and (5) enhanced toughness. 
The tool steels divide into major types, according to application and composition. 
The AISI uses a classification scheme that includes a prefix letter to identify the tool steel. 
In the following list of tool steel types, the prefix is indicated, and some typical 
compositions are presented in Table 6.5: 
 
T, M High-speed steels (Section 22.2.1) are used as cutting tools in machining 
operations (Chapter 21). They are formulated for high wear resistance and 
hot hardness. The original high-speed steels (HSS) were developed around 
1900. They permitted dramatic increases in cutting speed compared to previ- 
ously used tools; hence their name. The two AISI designations indicate the 
principal alloying element: T for tungsten and M for molybdenum. 
H Hot-working tool steels are intended for hot-working dies in forging, extru- sion, 
and die-casting. 
D  Cold-work tool steels are die steels used for cold working operations such as 
sheet metal pressworking, cold extrusion, and certain forging operations. The 
designation D stands for die. Closely related AISI designations are A and O. 
A and O stand for air- and oil-hardening. They all provide good wear resist- 
ance and low distortion. 
W Water-hardening tool steels have high carbon with little or no other alloy- 
ing elements. They can only be hardened by fast quenching in water. They 
are widely used because of low cost, but they are limited to low temperature 
applications. Cold heading dies are a typical application. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
139 
 
 
S Shock-resistant tool steels are intended for use in applications where high 
toughness is required, as in many sheet metal shearing, punching, and bend- 
ing operations. 
P Mold steels are used to make molds for molding plastics and rubber. 
L  Low-alloy tool steels are generally reserved for special applications. 
Tool steels are not the only tool materials. Plain carbon, low alloy, and stainless 
steels are used for many tool and die applications. Cast irons and certain nonfer- 
rous alloys are also suitable for certain tooling applications. In addition, several 
ceramic materials (e.g., Al2O3) are used as high-speed cutting inserts, abrasives, and other 
tools. 
 
Specialty Steels To complete this survey, several specialty steels not included 
in the previous coverage are mentioned. One of the reasons why these steels are special 
is that they possess unique processing characteristics. 
Maraging steels are low carbon alloys containing high amounts of nickel (15%–
25%) and lesser proportions of cobalt, molybdenum, and titanium. Chromium is also 
sometimes added for corrosion resistance. Maraging steels are strength- ened by 
precipitation hardening (Section 26.3), but in the unhardened condition, they are 
quite processable by forming and/or machining. They can also be readily welded. 
Heat treatment results in very high strength together with good toughness. Tensile 
strengths of 2000 MPa (290,000 lb/in2) and 10% elongation are not unusual. 
Applications include parts for missiles, machinery, dies, and other situations where 
these properties are required and justify the high cost of the alloy. 
Free-machining steels are carbon steels formulated to improve machinability 
(Section 23.1). Alloying elements include sulfur, lead, tin, bismuth, selenium, tellu- rium, 
and/or phosphorus. Lead is less-frequently used today because of environmen- tal and 
health concerns. Added in small amounts, these elements act to lubricate the cutting 
operation, reduce friction, and break up chips for easier disposal. Although more 
expensive than non-free-machining steels, they often pay for themselves in higher 
production rates and longer tool lives. 
Because of their good ductility, low-carbon sheet steels are widely used in sheet 
metal forming operations. Further improvements in formability have been achieved using 
a new class of sheet steel product called interstitial-free steels. These steels have 
extremely low carbon levels (0.005% C), which result from the use of alloying elements 
such as niobium and titanium that combine with carbon and leave the steel virtually 
free of interstitial atoms. The result is excellent ductility, even greater than low-C steels. 
Applications include deep-drawing operations in the automotive industry. 
 
 
6.2.4 
CAST IRONS 
 
Cast iron is an iron alloy containing from 2.1% to about 4% carbon and from 1% 
to 3% silicon. Its composition makes it highly suitable as a casting metal. In fact, 
the tonnage of cast iron castings is several times that of all other cast metal parts 
combined (excluding cast ingots made during steelmaking which are subsequently 
rolled into bars, plates, and similar stock). The overall tonnage of cast iron is second 
only to steel among metals. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
140 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
FIGURE 6.13 Carbon and silicon 
compositions for cast irons, with 
comparison to steels (most steels 
have relatively low silicon 
contents—cast steels have the 
higher Si content). Ductile iron 
is formed by special melting and 
pouring treatment of gray cast iron, 
and malleable iron is formed by heat 
treatment of white cast iron. 
 
 
There are several types of cast iron, the most important being gray cast iron. 
Other types include ductile iron, white cast iron, malleable iron, and various alloy cast 
irons. Typical chemical compositions of gray and white cast irons are shown in Figure 
6.13, indicating their relationship with cast steel. Ductile and malleable irons possess 
chemistries similar to the gray and white cast irons, respectively, but result from special 
treatments to be described in the following. Table 6.6 presents a listing of chemistries 
for the principal types together with mechanical properties. 
 
 
 
 
 TABLE • 6.6 Compositions and mechanical properties of selected cast irons. 
 
 
 
Type 
 
 
Fe 
 
 
C 
Typical Composition, % 
Si 
Mn 
Othera 
 
 
MPa 
Tensile Strength 
lb/in2 
Elongation, % 
Gray cast irons 
 
 
 
 
 
ASTM Class 20 
93.0 
3.5 
2.5 
0.65 
138 
20,000 
0.6 
ASTM Class 30 
93.6 
3.2 
2.1 
0.75 
207 
30,000 
0.6 
ASTM Class 40 
93.8 
3.1 
1.9 
0.85 
276 
40,000 
0.6 
ASTM Class 50 
93.5 
3.0 
1.6 
1.0 
0.67 Mo 
345 
50,000 
0.6 
Ductile irons 
 
 
 
 
 
ASTM A395 
94.4 
3.0 
2.5 
414 
60,000 
18 
ASTM A476 
93.8 
3.0 
3.0 
552 
80,000 
3 
White cast iron 
 
 
 
 
 
Low-C 
92.5 
2.5 
1.3 
0.4 
1.5Ni, 1Cr, 0.5Mo 
276 
40,000 
0 
Malleable irons 
 
 
 
 
 
Ferritic 
95.3 
2.6 
1.4 
0.4 
345 
50,000 
10 
Pearlitic 
95.1 
2.4 
1.4 
0.8 
414 
60,000 
10 
Compiled from [11]. Cast irons are identified by various systems. This table is an attempt to indicate the particular cast iron grade using 
the most common identification for each type. 
aCast irons also contain phosphorus and sulfur usually totaling less than 0.3%. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
141 
 
 
Gray Cast Iron Gray cast iron accounts for the largest tonnage among the cast irons. 
It has a composition in the range 2.5% to 4% carbon and 1% to 3% sili- con. 
This chemistry results in the formation of graphite (carbon) flakes distributed 
throughout the cast product upon solidification. The structure causes the surface of the 
metal to have a gray color when fractured; hence the name gray cast iron. The 
dispersion of graphite flakes accounts for two attractive properties: (1) good vibra- tion 
damping, which is desirable in engines and other machinery; and (2) internal 
lubricating qualities, which makes the cast metal machinable. 
The strength of gray cast iron spans a significant range. The American Society 
for Testing of Materials (ASTM) uses a classification method for gray cast iron 
that is intended to provide a minimum tensile strength (TS) specification for the various 
classes: Class 20 gray cast iron has a TS of 20,000 lb/in2, Class 30 has a TS of 30,000 
lb/in2, and so forth, up to around 70,000 lb/in2 (see Table 6.6 for equiva- lent TS in 
metric units). The compressive strength of gray cast iron is significantly greater than 
its tensile strength. Properties of the casting can be controlled to some extent by heat 
treatment. Ductility of gray cast iron is very low; it is a relatively brit- tle material. 
Products made from gray cast iron include automotive engine blocks and heads, motor 
housings, and machine tool bases. 
 
Ductile Iron This is an iron with the composition of gray iron in which the mol- 
ten metal is chemically treated before pouring to cause the formation of graphite 
spheroids rather than flakes. This results in a stronger and more ductile iron, hence 
its name. Applications include machinery components requiring high strength and 
good wear resistance. 
 
White Cast Iron This cast iron has less carbon and silicon than gray cast iron. It 
is formed by more rapid cooling of the molten metal after pouring, thus causing the 
carbon to remain chemically combined with iron in the form of cementite (Fe3C), 
rather than precipitating out of solution in the form of flakes. When fractured, the 
surface has a white crystalline appearance that gives the iron its name. Owing to 
the cementite, white cast iron is hard and brittle, and its wear resistance is excellent. 
Strength is good, with TS of 276 MPa (40,000 lb/in2) being typical. These properties make 
white cast iron suitable for applications in which wear resistance is required. 
Railway brake shoes are an example. 
 
Malleable Iron When castings of white cast iron are heat treated to separate the 
carbon out of solution and form graphite aggregates, the resulting metal is called 
malleable iron. The new microstructure can possess substantial ductility (up to 20% 
elongation)—a significant difference from the metal out of which it was transformed. 
Typical products made of malleable cast iron include pipe fittings and flanges, certain 
machine components, and railroad equipment parts. 
 
Alloy Cast Irons Cast irons can be alloyed for special properties and applica- 
tions. These alloy cast irons are classified as follows: (1) heat-treatable types that 
can be hardened by martensite formation; (2) corrosion-resistant types, whose 
alloying elements include nickel and chromium; and (3) heat-resistant types 
containing high proportions of nickel for hot hardness and resistance to high 
temperature oxidation. 
Section 6.2/Ferrous Metals 
142 
 
 
Nonferrous Metals 
The nonferrous metals include metal elements and alloys not based on iron. The 
most important engineering metals in the nonferrous group are aluminum, copper, 
magnesium, nickel, titanium, and zinc, and their alloys. 
Although the nonferrous metals as a group cannot match the strength of the 
steels, certain nonferrous alloys have corrosion resistance and/or strength-to- weight 
ratios that make them competitive with steels in moderate-to-high stress applications. 
In addition, many of the nonferrous metals have properties other than mechanical 
that make them ideal for applications in which steel would be quite unsuitable. 
For example, copper has one of the lowest electrical resistivities among metals and is 
widely used for electrical wire. Aluminum is an excellent thermal conductor, and its 
applications include heat exchangers and cooking pans. It is also one of the most 
readily formed metals, and is valued for that reason also. Zinc has a relatively low 
melting point, so zinc is widely used in die casting opera- tions. The common 
nonferrous metals have their own combination of properties that make them 
attractive in a variety of applications. The following nine sections cover the nonferrous 
metals that are the most commercially and technologically important. 
 
 
6.3.1 ALUMINUM AND ITS ALLOYS 
 
Aluminum and magnesium are light metals, and they are often specified in engineer- 
ing applications for this feature. Both elements are abundant on Earth, aluminum 
on land and magnesium in the sea, although neither is easily extracted from their 
natural states. 
Properties and other data on aluminum are listed in Table 6.1(b). Among the 
major metals, it is a relative newcomer, dating only to the late 1800s (Historical 
Note 6.2). The coverage in this section includes (1) a brief description of how alumi- num 
is produced and (2) a discussion of the properties and the designation system for 
the metal and its alloys. 
 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 (continued): (b) Aluminum. 
 
Symbol: 
Al 
Atomic number:  13 
Specific gravity: 
2.7 
Crystal structure:  FCC 
Melting temperature:  660°C (1220°F) 
Elastic modulus:  69,000 MPa (10 X 106 lb/in2) 
Principal ore: 
Bauxite (impure mix of Al2O3 and Al(OH)3) 
Alloying elements:  Copper, magnesium, manganese, silicon, and zinc 
Typical applications: Containers (aluminum cans), wrapping foil, electrical conduc- 
tors, pots and pans, parts for construction, aerospace, automo- 
tive, and other uses in which light weight is important 
6.3 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
143 
 
 
 
 
 
Aluminum Production The principal aluminum ore is bauxite, which consists 
largely of hydrated aluminum oxide (Al2O3-H2O) and other oxides. Extraction of 
the aluminum from bauxite can be summarized in three steps: (1) washing and 
crushing the ore into fine powders; (2) the Bayer process, in which the bauxite is 
converted to pure alumina (Al2O3); and (3) electrolysis, in which the alumina is 
separated into aluminum and oxygen gas (O2). The Bayer process, named after the 
German chemist who developed it, involves solution of bauxite powders in aque- 
ous caustic soda (NaOH) under pressure, followed by precipitation of pure Al2O3 
from solution. Alumina is commercially important in its own right as an engineering 
ceramic (Chapter 7). 
Electrolysis to separate Al2O3 into its constituent elements requires dissolving 
the precipitate in a molten bath of cryolite (Na3AlF6) and subjecting the solution to 
direct current between the plates of an electrolytic furnace. The electrolyte dissoci- 
ates to form aluminum at the cathode and oxygen gas at the anode. 
 
Properties and Designation Scheme Aluminum has high electrical and ther- 
mal conductivity, and its resistance to corrosion is excellent because of the forma- 
tion of a hard, thin oxide surface film. It is a very ductile metal and is noted for its 
formability. Pure aluminum is relatively low in strength, but it can be alloyed and 
heat treated to compete with some steels, especially when weight is an important 
consideration. 
The designation system for aluminum alloys is a four-digit code number. The sys- 
tem has two parts, one for wrought aluminums and the other for cast aluminums. The 
difference is that a decimal point is used after the third digit for cast aluminums. The 
designations are presented in Table 6.7(a). 
Because properties of aluminum alloys are so influenced by work hardening and 
heat treatment, the temper (strengthening treatment, if any) must be designated in 
addition to the composition code. The principal temper designations are presented 
in Table 6.7(b). This designation is attached to the preceding four-digit number, 
separated from it by a hyphen, to indicate the treatment or absence thereof; for 
Historical Note 6.2 Aluminum 
In 1807, the English chemist Humphrey Davy, believ- work of Charles Hall in the United States and Paul 
ing that the mineral alumina (Al2O3) had a metallic 
Heroult in France around 1886. In 1888, Hall and a 
base, attempted to extract the metal. He did not suc- group of businessmen started the Pittsburgh Reduc- 
ceed but was sufficiently convinced that he proceeded tion Co. The first ingot of aluminum was produced by 
to name the metal anyway: alumium, later changing the electrolytic smelting process that same year. De- 
the name to aluminum. In 1825, the Danish physicist/ mand for aluminum grew. The need for large amounts 
chemist Hans Orsted finally succeeded in separating of electricity in the production process led the com- 
the metal. He noted that it “resembles tin.” In 1845, 
pany to relocate in Niagara Falls in 1895 where hydro- 
the German physicist Friedrich Wohler was the first electric power was becoming available at very low 
to determine the specific gravity, ductility, and various cost. In 1907, the company changed its name to the 
other properties of aluminum. 
 
Aluminum Company of America (Alcoa). It was the 
The modern electrolytic process for producing alu- 
sole producer of aluminum in the United States until 
minum was based on the concurrent but independent 
World War II. 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
144 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.7(a) Designations of wrought and cast aluminum alloys. 
 
Alloy Group 
Wrought Code 
Cast Code 
Aluminum, 99.0% or higher purity 
1XXX 
1XX.X 
Aluminum alloys, by major element(s): 
Copper 
Manganese 
Silicon + copper and/or magnesium 
Silicon 
Magnesium 
Magnesium and silicon 
Zinc 
Tin 
Other 
 
2XXX 
3XXX 
4XXX 
5XXX 
6XXX 
7XXX 
8XXX 
 
2XX.X 
3XX.X 
4XX.X 
5XX.X 
7XX.X 
8XX.X 
9XX.X 
 
 
 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.7(b) Temper designations for aluminum alloys. 
 
Temper 
Description 
F 
As fabricated—no special treatment. 
H 
Strain hardened (wrought aluminums). H is followed by two digits, the first indicating a heat 
treatment, if any; and the second indicating the degree of work hardening remaining; for example: 
H1X No heat treatment after strain hardening, and X = 1 to 9, indicating degree of work hardening. 
H2X Partially annealed, and X = degree of work hardening remaining in product. 
H3X Stabilized, and X = degree of work hardening remaining. Stabilized means heating to slightly 
above service temperature anticipated. 
O 
Annealed to relieve strain hardening and improve ductility; reduces strength to lowest level. 
T 
Thermal treatment to produce stable tempers other than F, H, or O. It is followed by a digit to 
indicate specific treatments; for example: 
T1 = cooled from elevated temperature, naturally aged. 
T2 = cooled from elevated temperature, cold worked, naturally aged. 
T3 = solution heat treated, cold worked, naturally aged. 
T4 = solution heat treated and naturally aged. 
T5 = cooled from elevated temperature, artificially aged. 
T6 = solution heat treated and artificially aged. 
T7 = solution heat treated and overaged or stabilized. 
T8 = solution heat treated, cold worked, artificially aged. 
T9 = solution heat treated, artificially aged, and cold worked. 
T10 = cooled from elevated temperature, cold worked, and artificially aged. 
W 
Solution heat treatment, applied to alloys that age harden in service; it is an unstable temper. 
 
 
example, 2024-T3. Of course, temper treatments that specify strain hardening do 
not apply to the cast alloys. Some examples of the remarkable differences in the 
mechanical properties of aluminum alloys that result from the different treatments 
are presented in Table 6.8. 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
145 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.8 Compositions and mechanical properties of selected aluminum alloys. 
 
 
Code 
 
Al 
Typical Composition, %a 
Cu 
Fe 
Mg 
Mn 
 
Si 
 
Temper 
 
MPa 
Tensile Strength 
lb/in2 
Elongation 
1050 
99.5 
0.4 
0.3 
O 
76 
11,000 
39 
 
 
 
 
H18 
159 
23,000 
7 
1100 
99.0 
0.6 
0.3 
O 
90 
13,000 
40 
 
 
 
 
H18 
165 
24,000 
10 
2024 
93.5 
4.4 
0.5 
1.5 
0.6 
0.5 
O 
185 
27,000 
20 
 
 
 
 
T3 
485 
70,000 
18 
3004 
96.5 
0.3 
0.7 
1.0 
1.2 
0.3 
O 
180 
26,000 
22 
 
 
 
 
H36 
260 
38,000 
7 
4043 
93.5 
0.3 
0.8 
5.2 
O 
130 
19,000 
25 
 
 
 
 
H18 
285 
41,000 
1 
5050 
96.9 
0.2 
0.7 
1.4 
0.1 
0.4 
O 
125 
18,000 
18 
 
 
 
 
H38 
200 
29,000 
3 
6063 
98.5 
0.3 
0.7 
0.4 
O 
90 
13,000 
25 
 
 
 
 
T4 
172 
25,000 
20 
 
Compiled from [12]. 
a In addition to elements listed, alloy may contain trace amounts of other elements such as copper, magnesium, manganese, vanadium, 
and zinc. 
 
6.3.2 MAGNESIUM AND ITS ALLOYS 
 
Magnesium (Mg) is the lightest of the structural metals. Its specific gravity and 
other basic data are presented in Table 6.1(c). Magnesium and its alloys are avail- able 
in both wrought and cast forms. It is relatively easy to machine. However, in all 
processing of magnesium, small particles of the metal (such as small metal cutting 
chips) oxidize rapidly, and care must be taken to avoid fire hazards. 
 
Magnesium Production Sea water contains about 0.13% MgCl2, and this is the 
source of most commercially produced magnesium. To extract Mg, a batch of sea water 
is mixed with milk of lime—calcium hydroxide (Ca(OH)2). The resulting reaction pre- 
cipitates magnesium hydroxide (Mg(OH)2) that settles and is removed as a slurry. 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 (continued): (c) Magnesium. 
 
Symbol: 
Mg 
Atomic number: 
12 
Specific gravity: 
1.74 
Crystal structure: 
HCP 
Melting temperature: 
650°C (1202°F) 
Elastic modulus: 
48,000 MPa (7 X 106 lb/in2) 
Extracted from: 
MgCl2 in sea water by electrolysis 
Alloying elements: 
See Table 6.9 
Typical applications: 
Aerospace, missiles, bicycles, chain saw housings, luggage, 
and other applications where light weight is a primary 
requirement. 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
146 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.9 Code letters used to identify alloying elements in magnesium alloys. 
 
A 
Aluminum (Al) 
E 
Rare earth metals 
H 
Thorium (Th) 
K 
Zirconium (Zr) 
M 
Manganese (Mn) 
P 
Lead (Pb) 
Q 
Silver (Ag) 
S 
Silicon (Si) 
T 
Tin (Sn) 
Z 
Zinc (Zn) 
 
The slurry is then filtered to increase Mg(OH)2 content and then mixed with hydro- 
chloric acid (HCl), which reacts with the hydroxide to form concentrated MgCl2— 
much more concentrated than the original sea water. Electrolysis is used to decompose the 
salt into magnesium (Mg) and chlorine gas (Cl2). The magnesium is then cast into 
ingots for subsequent processing. The chlorine is recycled to form more MgCl2. 
 
Properties and Designation Scheme As a pure metal, magnesium is relatively 
soft and lacks sufficient strength for most engineering applications. However, it can be 
alloyed and heat treated to achieve strengths comparable to aluminum alloys. In par- 
ticular, its strength-to-weight ratio is an advantage in aircraft and missile components. 
The designation scheme for magnesium alloys uses a three-to-five-character 
alphanumeric code. The first two characters are letters that identify the principal 
alloying elements (up to two elements can be specified in the code, in order of 
decreasing percentages, or alphabetically if equal percentages). These code letters 
are listed in Table 6.9. The letters are followed by a two-digit number that indicates, 
respectively, the amounts of the two alloying ingredients to the nearest percent. 
Finally, the last symbol is a letter that indicates some variation in composition, or 
simply the chronological order in which it was standardized for commercial avail- 
ability. Magnesium alloys also require specification of a temper, and the same basic 
scheme presented in Table 6.7(b) for aluminum is used for magnesium alloys. 
Some examples of magnesium alloys, illustrating the designation scheme and 
indicating tensile strength and ductility of these alloys, are presented in Table 6.10. 
 
 
TABLE • 6.10 Compositions and mechanical properties of selected magnesium alloys. 
 
 
 
Typical Composition, % 
 
 
Tensile Strength 
 
Code 
Mg 
Al 
Mn 
Si 
Zn 
Other 
Process 
MPa 
lb/in2 
Elongation 
AZ10A 
98.0 
1.3 
0.2 
0.1 
0.4  
Wrought 
240 
35,000 
10 
AZ80A 
91.0 
8.5 
 
 
0.5 
 
Forged 
330 
48,000 
11 
HM31A 
95.8 
1.2 
3.0 Th 
Wrought 
283 
41,000 
10 
ZK21A 
97.1 
2.3 
6 Zr 
Wrought 
260 
38,000 
4 
AM60 
92.8 
6.0 
0.1 
0.5 
0.2 
0.3 Cu 
Cast 
220 
32,000 
6 
AZ63A 
91.0 
6.0 
 
 
3.0  
Cast 
200 
29,000 
6 
 
Compiled from [12]. 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
147 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 (continued): (d) Copper. 
 
Symbol: 
Cu 
Atomic number: 
29 
Specific gravity: 
8.96 
Crystal structure: 
FCC 
Melting temperature: 
1083°C (1981°F) 
Elastic modulus: 
110,000 MPa (16 X 106 lb/in2) 
Ore extracted from: 
Several: e.g., chalcopyrite (CuFeS2). 
Alloying elements: 
Tin (bronze), zinc (brass), aluminum, silicon, nickel, and beryllium. 
Typical applications: Electrical conductors and components, ammunition (brass), pots and pans, jewelry, 
plumbing, marine applications, heat exchangers, springs (Be-Cu). 
 
 
6.3.3 
COPPER AND ITS ALLOYS 
 
Copper (Cu) is one of the oldest metals known (Historical Note 6.3). Basic data on 
the element copper are presented in Table 6.1(d). 
 
 
 
 
Copper Production In ancient times, copper was available in nature as a free 
element. Today these natural deposits are more difficult to find, and copper is now 
extracted from ores that are mostly sulfides, such as chalcopyrite (CuFeS2). The ore 
is crushed (Section 16.1.1), concentrated by flotation, and then smelted (melted or 
fused, often with an associated chemical reaction to separate a metal from its ore). 
The resulting copper is called blister copper, which is between 98% and 99% pure. 
Electrolysis is used to obtain higher purity levels suitable for commercial use. 
 
Properties and Designation Scheme Pure copper has a distinctive reddish- pink 
color, but its most distinguishing engineering property is its low electrical resistivity—
one of the lowest of all elements. Because of this property, and its rela- tive abundance 
in nature, commercially pure copper is widely used as an electrical conductor. (The 
conductivity of copper decreases significantly as alloying elements are added.) Cu is 
also an excellent thermal conductor. Copper is one of the noble 
Historical Note 6.3  Copper 
Copper was one of the first metals used by human later found that copper mixed with tin could be more cultures 
(gold was the other). Discovery of the metal  readily cast and worked than the pure metal. This led was probably 
around 6000 B.C.E. At that time, copper  to the widespread use of bronze and the subsequent was found in the 
free metallic state. Ancient peoples naming of the Bronze Age, dated from about 2000 fashioned implements 
and weapons out of it by hit-  B.C.E. to the time of Christ. 
ting the metal (cold forging). Pounding copper made it  
 
To the ancient Romans, the island of Cyprus was al- 
harder (strain hardening); this and its attractive reddish 
most the only source of copper. They called the metal 
color made it valuable in early civilizations. 
 
aes cyprium (ore of Cyprus). This was shortened to 
Around 4000 B.C.E., it was discovered that copper 
Cyprium and subsequently renamed Cuprium. From 
could be melted and cast into useful shapes. It was  this derives the chemical symbol Cu. 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
148 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.11 Compositions and mechanical properties of selected copper alloys. 
 
 
Code 
 
Cu 
Typical Composition, % 
Be 
Ni 
Sn 
 
Zn 
Tensile Strength 
 
MPa 
lb/in2 
 
Elongation, % 
C10100 
99.99 
 
 
235 
34,000 
45 
C11000 
99.95 
 
 
220 
32,000 
45 
C17000 
98.0 
1.7 
a 
 
500 
70,000 
45 
C24000 
80.0 
 
20.0 
290 
42,000 
52 
C26000 
70.0 
 
30.0 
300 
44,000 
68 
C52100 
92.0 
8.0 
 
380 
55,000 
70 
C71500 
70.0 
30.0 
 
380 
55,000 
45 
C71500b 
70.0 
30.0 
 
580 
84,000 
3 
Compiled from [12]. 
aSmall amounts of Ni and Fe + 0.3 Co. 
bHeat treated for high strength. 
 
metals (gold and silver are also noble metals), so it is corrosion resistant. All of 
these properties combine to make copper one of the most important metals. 
On the downside, the strength and hardness of copper are relatively low, especially 
when weight is taken into account. Accordingly, to improve strength (as well as for 
other reasons), copper is frequently alloyed. Bronze is an alloy of copper and tin (typi- 
cally about 90% Cu and 10% Sn), still widely used today despite its ancient ancestry. 
Additional bronze alloys have been developed, based on other elements than tin; these 
include aluminum bronzes, and silicon bronzes. Brass is another familiar copper alloy, 
composed of copper and zinc (typically around 65% Cu and 35% Zn). The highest 
strength alloy of copper is beryllium-copper (only about 2% Be). It can be heat treated 
to tensile strengths of 1035 MPa (150,000 lb/in2). Be-Cu alloys are used for springs. 
The designation of copper alloys is based on the Unified Numbering System for 
Metals and Alloys (UNS), which uses a five-digit number preceded by the letter C 
(C for copper). The alloys are processed in wrought and cast forms, and the designa- 
tion system includes both. Some copper alloys with compositions and mechanical 
properties are presented in Table 6.11. 
 
 
6.3.4 
NICKEL AND ITS ALLOYS 
 
Nickel (Ni) is similar to iron in many respects. It is magnetic, and its modulus of 
elasticity is virtually the same as that of iron and steel. However, it is much more 
corrosion resistant, and the high temperature properties of its alloys are generally 
superior. Because of its corrosion-resistant characteristics, it is widely used as an 
alloying element in steel, such as stainless steel, and as a plating metal on other met- 
als such as plain carbon steel. 
 
Nickel Production The most important ore of nickel is pentlandite ((Ni, Fe)9S8).To 
extract the nickel, the ore is first crushed and ground with water. Flotation techniques 
are used to separate the sulfides from other minerals mixed with the ore. The nickel 
sulfide is then heated to burn off some of the sulfur, followed by smelting to remove 
iron and silicon. Further refinement is accomplished in a Bessemer-style converter 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
149 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 (continued): (e) Nickel. 
 
Symbol: 
Ni 
Atomic number: 
28 
Specific gravity: 
8.90 
Crystal structure: 
FCC 
Melting temperature: 
1453°C (2647°F) 
Elastic Modulus: 209,000 MPa (30 X 106 lb/in2) 
Ore extracted from: 
Pentlandite ((Fe, Ni)9S8) 
Alloying elements: 
Copper, chromium, iron, aluminum. 
Typical applications: Stainless steel alloying ingredient, plating metal for steel, applications requiring high 
temperature and corrosion resistance. 
 
 
 
to yield high-concentration nickel sulfide (NiS). Electrolysis is then used to recover 
high-purity nickel from the compound. Ores of nickel are sometimes mixed with cop- per 
ores, and the recovery technique described here also yields copper in these cases. 
 
Nickel Alloys Alloys of nickel are commercially important in their own right and 
are noted for corrosion resistance and high temperature performance. Composition, 
tensile strength, and ductility of some of the nickel alloys are given in Table 6.12. In 
addition, a number of superalloys are based on nickel (Section 6.4). 
 
 
6.3.5 TITANIUM AND ITS ALLOYS 
 
Titanium (Ti) is fairly abundant in nature, constituting about 1% of Earth’s crust 
(aluminum, the most abundant, is about 8%). The density of Ti is between alumi- 
num and iron. Data for Ti are presented in Table 6.1(f). Its importance has grown 
in recent decades due to its aerospace applications where its light weight and good 
strength-to-weight ratio are exploited. 
 
Titanium Production The principal ores of titanium are rutile, which is 98 to 
99% TiO2, and ilmenite, which is a combination of FeO and TiO2. Rutile is preferred 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.12 Compositions and mechanical properties of selected nickel alloys. 
 
 
 
 
Typical Composition, %  
 
Tensile Strength  
Code 
Ni 
Cr 
Cu 
Fe 
Mn 
Si 
Other 
MPa 
lb/in2 
Elongation, % 
270 
99.9 
 
a 
a 
 
 
 
345 
50,000 
50 
200 
99.0 
 
0.2 
0.3 
0.2 
0.2 
C, S 
462 
67,000 
47 
400 
66.8 
 
30.0 
2.5 
0.2 
0.5 
C 
550 
80,000 
40 
600 
74.0 
16.0 
0.5 
8.0 
1.0 
0.5 
 
655 
95,000 
40 
230 
52.8 
22.0  
3.0 
0.4 
0.4 
b 
860 
125,000 
47 
 
Compiled from [12]. 
aTrace amounts. 
bOther alloying ingredients in Grade 230: 5% Co, 2% Mo, 14% W, 0.3% Al, 0.1% C. 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
150 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 (continued): (f) Titanium. 
 
Symbol: 
Ti 
Atomic number: 
22 
Specific gravity: 
 4.51 
Crystal structure: 
HCP 
Melting temperature: 
1668°C (3034°F) 
Elastic modulus: 
117,000 MPa (17 X 106 lb/in2) 
Ores extracted from: 
Rutile (TiO2) and Ilmenite (FeTiO3) 
Alloying elements: 
Aluminum, tin, vanadium, copper, and magnesium. 
Typical applications: 
Jet engine components, other aerospace applications, prosthetic implants. 
 
as an ore because of its higher Ti content. In recovery of the metal from its ores, the 
TiO2 is converted to titanium tetrachloride (TiCl4) by reacting the compound with 
chlorine gas. This is followed by a sequence of distillation steps to remove impurities. The 
highly concentrated TiCl4 is then reduced to metallic titanium by reaction with 
magnesium; this is known as the Kroll process. Sodium can also be used as a reduc- 
ing agent. In either case, an inert atmosphere must be maintained to prevent O2, N2, 
or H2 from contaminating the Ti, owing to its chemical affinity for these gases. The 
resulting metal is used to cast ingots of titanium and its alloys. 
 
Properties of Titanium Ti’s coefficient of thermal expansion is relatively low 
among metals. It is stiffer and stronger than aluminum, and it retains good strength 
at elevated temperatures. Pure titanium is reactive, which presents problems in 
processing, especially in the molten state. However, at room temperature it forms 
a thin adherent oxide coating (TiO2) that provides excellent corrosion resistance. 
These properties give rise to two principal application areas for titanium: (1) in 
the commercially pure state, Ti is used for corrosion resistant components, such as 
marine components and prosthetic implants; and (2) titanium alloys are used as 
high-strength components in temperatures ranging from ambient to above 550°C 
(1000°F), especially where its excellent strength-to-weight ratio is exploited. These 
latter applications include aircraft and missile components. Some of the alloying 
elements used with titanium include aluminum, manganese, tin, and vanadium. 
Some compositions and mechanical properties for several alloys are presented in 
Table 6.13. 
 
 
TABLE • 6.13 Compositions and mechanical properties of selected titanium alloys. 
 
 
 
 
Typical Composition, %  
 
Tensile Strength 
 
Codea 
Ti 
Al 
Cu 
Fe 
V 
Other 
 
MPa 
lb/in2 
Elongation, % 
R50250 
99.8 
 
0.2 
 
 
240 
35,000 
24 
R56400 
89.6 
6.0 
0.3 
4.0 
b 
1000 
145,000 
12 
R54810 
90.0 
8.0  
1.0 
1 Mo,b 
985 
143,000 
15 
R56620 
84.3 
6.0 
0.8 
0.8 
6.0 
2 Sn,b 
1030 
150,000 
14 
Compiled from [1] and [12]. 
aUnited Numbering System (UNS). 
bTraces of C, H, O. 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
151 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 (continued): (g) zinc. 
 
Symbol: 
Zn 
Atomic number: 
30 
Specific gravity: 
7.13 
Crystal structure: 
HCP 
Melting temperature: 
419°C (786°F) 
Elastic modulus: 90,000 MPa (13 X 106 lb/in2)a 
Ore extracted from: 
Sphalerite (ZnS) 
Alloying elements: 
Aluminum, magnesium, copper 
Typical applications: 
Galvanized steel and iron, die castings, alloying element in brass 
aZinc creeps, which makes it difficult to measure modulus of elasticity; some tables of properties omit E for zinc for this reason. 
 
6.3.6 
ZINC AND ITS ALLOYS 
 
Table 6.1(g) lists basic data on zinc. Its low melting point makes it attractive as a 
casting metal. It also provides corrosion protection when coated onto steel or iron; 
galvanized steel is steel that has been coated with zinc. 
 
Production of Zinc Zinc blende or sphalerite is the principal ore of zinc; it contains 
zinc sulfide (ZnS). Other important ores include smithsonite, which is zinc 
carbonate (ZnCO3), and hemimorphate, which is hydrous zinc silicate (Zn4Si2O7OH-
H2O). 
Sphalerite must be concentrated (beneficiated, as it is called) because of the small 
fraction of zinc sulfide present in the ore. This is accomplished by first crushing the 
ore, then grinding with water in a ball mill (Section 16.1.1) to create a slurry. In the 
presence of a frothing agent, the slurry is agitated so that the mineral particles float to 
the top and can be skimmed off (separated from the lower grade minerals). The 
concentrated zinc sulfide is then roasted at around 1260°C (2300°F), so that zinc oxide 
(ZnO) is formed from the reaction. 
There are various thermochemical processes for recovering zinc from this oxide, 
all of which reduce zinc oxide by means of carbon. The carbon combines with oxy- 
gen in ZnO to form CO and/or CO2, thus freeing Zn in the form of vapor that is 
condensed to yield the desired metal. 
An electrolytic process is also widely used, accounting for about half the world’s 
production of zinc. This process also begins with the preparation of ZnO, which is 
mixed with dilute sulfuric acid (H2SO4), followed by electrolysis to separate the 
resulting zinc sulfate (ZnSO4) solution to yield the pure metal. 
 
Zinc Alloys and Applications Several alloys of zinc are listed in Table 6.14, 
with data on composition, tensile strength, and applications. Zinc alloys are widely used 
in die casting to mass produce components for the automotive and appliance 
industries. Another major application of zinc is in galvanized steel. As the name 
suggests, a galvanic cell is created in galvanized steel (Zn is the anode and steel is 
the cathode) that protects the steel from corrosive attack. A third important use 
of zinc is in brass. As previously indicated in the discussion of copper, this alloy 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
152 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.14 Compositions, tensile strength, and applications of selected zinc alloys. 
 
 
 
Typical Composition, % 
 
Tensile Strength 
 
Code 
Zn 
Al 
Cu 
Mg 
Fe 
 
MPa 
lb/in2 
Application 
Z33520 
95.6 
4.0 
0.25 
0.04 
0.1 
283 
41,000 
Die casting 
Z35540 
93.4 
4.0 
2.5 
0.04 
0.1 
359 
52,000 
Die casting 
Z35635 
91.0 
8.0 
1.0 
0.02 
0.06 
374 
54,000 
Foundry alloy 
Z35840 
70.9 
27.0 
2.0 
0.02 
0.07 
425 
62,000 
Foundry alloy 
Z45330 
98.9 
 
1.0 
0.01 
 
227 
33,000 
Rolled alloy 
Compiled from [12]. 
aUNS - Unified Numbering System for metals. 
 
consists of copper and zinc, in the ratio of about 2/3 Cu to 1/3 Zn. Finally, readers 
may be interested to know that the U.S. one-cent coin is mostly zinc. The penny is 
coined out of zinc and then electroplated with copper, so that the final propor- tions 
are 97.5% Zn and 2.5% Cu. It costs the U.S. Mint about 1.5 cents to produce each 
penny. 
 
 
6.3.7 LEAD AND TIN 
 
Lead (Pb) and tin (Sn) are often considered together because of their low melting 
temperatures, and because they are used in soldering alloys to make electrical con- 
nections. The phase diagram for the tin–lead alloy system is depicted in Figure 6.3. 
Basic data for lead and tin are presented in Table 6.1(h). 
Lead is a dense metal with a low melting point; other properties include low 
strength, low hardness (the word “soft” is appropriate), high ductility, and good cor- rosion 
resistance. In addition to its use in solder, applications of lead and its alloys include 
ammunition, type metals, x-ray shielding, storage batteries, bearings, and vibration 
damping. It has also been widely used in chemicals and paints. Principal alloying 
elements with lead are tin and antimony. 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 (continued): (h) lead and tin. 
 
 
Lead 
Tin 
Symbol: 
Pb 
Sn 
Atomic number: 
82 
50 
Specific gravity: 
11.35 
7.30 
Crystal structure: 
FCC 
HCP 
Melting temperature: 
327°C (621°F) 
232°C (449°F) 
Modulus of elasticity: 
21,000 MPa (3 X 106 lb/in2) 
42,000 MPa (6 X 106 lb/in2) 
Ore from which extracted: 
Galena (PbS) 
Cassiterite (SnO2) 
Typical alloying elements: 
Tin, antimony 
Lead, copper 
Typical applications: 
See text 
Bronze, solder, tin cans 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
153 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 (continued): (i) refractory metals. 
 
 
Molybdenum 
Tungsten 
Symbol: 
Mo 
W 
74 
19.3 
BCC 
3400°C (6150°F) 
407,000 MPa (59 X 106 lb/in3) 
Scheelite (CaWO4), 
Wolframite ((Fe,Mn)WO4) 
a 
 
Light filaments, rocket engine 
parts, WC tools. 
Atomic number: 
42 
Specific gravity: 
10.2 
Crystal structure: 
BCC 
Melting point: 
2619°C (4730°F) 
Elastic modulus: 
324,000 MPa (47 X 106 lb/in2) 
Principal ores: 
Molybdenite (MoS2) 
Alloying elements: 
See text 
Applications: 
See text 
 
aTungsten is used as a pure metal and as an alloying ingredient, but few alloys are based on W. 
 
 
 
Tin has an even lower melting point than lead; other properties include low 
strength, low hardness, and good ductility. The earliest use of tin was in bronze, the 
alloy consisting of copper and tin developed around 3000 B.C. in Mesopotamia and 
Egypt. Bronze is still an important commercial alloy (although its relative impor- 
tance has declined during 5000 years). Other uses of tin include tin-coated sheet 
steel containers (“tin cans”) for storing food and, of course, solder metal. 
 
 
6.3.8 
REFRACTORY METALS 
 
The refractory metals are metals capable of enduring high temperatures. The most 
important metals in this group are molybdenum and tungsten; see Table 6.1(i). Other 
refractory metals are columbium (Cb) and tantalum (Ta). In general, these metals 
and their alloys are capable of maintaining high strength and hardness at elevated 
temperatures. 
Molybdenum has a high melting point and is relatively dense, stiff, and strong. 
It is used both as a pure metal (99.9+% Mo) and as an alloy. The principal alloy 
is TZM, which contains small amounts of titanium and zirconium (less than 1% 
total). Mo and its alloys possess good high temperature strength, and this accounts for 
many of its applications, which include heat shields, heating elements, elec- trodes 
for resistance welding, dies for high temperature work (e.g., die casting molds), 
and parts for rocket and jet engines. In addition to these applications, molybdenum 
is also widely used as an alloying ingredient in other metals, such as steels and 
superalloys. 
Tungsten (W) has the highest melting point among metals and is one of the dens- 
est. It is also the stiffest and hardest of all pure metals. Its most familiar application is 
filament wire in incandescent light bulbs. Applications of tungsten are typically char- 
acterized by high operating temperatures, such as parts for rocket and jet engines 
and electrodes for arc welding. W is also widely used as an element in tool steels, 
heat resistant alloys, and tungsten carbide (Section 7.3.2). 
Section 6.3/Nonferrous Metals 
154 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.1 (continued): (j) the precious metals 
 
 
Gold 
Platinum 
Silver 
Symbol: 
Au 
Pt 
Ag 
Atomic number: 
79 
78 
47 
Specific gravity: 
19.3 
21.5 
10.5 
Crystal structure: 
FCC 
FCC 
FCC 
Melting temperature: 
1063°C (1945°F) 
1769°C (3216°F) 
961°C (1762°F) 
Principal ores: 
a 
a 
a 
Applications: 
See text 
See text 
See text 
 
aAll three precious metals are mined from deposits in which the pure metal is mixed with other ores 
and metals. Silver is also mined from the ore Argentite (Ag2S). 
 
 
 
A major disadvantage of both Mo and W is their propensity to oxidize at high 
temperatures, above about 600°C (1000°F), thus detracting from their high tempera- 
ture properties. To overcome this deficiency, either protective coatings must be used 
on these metals in high temperature applications or the metal parts must operate in 
a vacuum. For example, the tungsten filament must be energized in a vacuum inside 
the glass light bulb. 
 
 
6.3.9 
PRECIOUS METALS 
 
The precious metals, also called the noble metals because they are chemically inac- 
tive, include silver, gold, and platinum. They are attractive metals, available in lim- 
ited supply, and have been used throughout civilized history for coinage and to 
underwrite paper currency. They are also widely used in jewelry and similar appli- 
cations that exploit their high value. As a group, these precious metals possess high 
density, good ductility, high electrical conductivity, and good corrosion resistance; see 
Table 6.1(j). 
Silver (Ag) is less expensive per unit weight than gold or platinum. Nevertheless, 
its attractive “silvery” luster makes it a highly valued metal in coins, jewelry, and 
tableware (which even assumes the name of the metal: “silverware”). It is also used for 
fillings in dental work. Silver has the highest electrical conductivity of any metal, 
which makes it useful for contacts in electronics applications. Finally, it should be 
mentioned that light-sensitive silver chloride and other silver halides are the basis 
for photography. 
Gold (Au) is one of the heaviest metals; it is soft and easily formed, and possesses 
a distinctive yellow color that adds to its value. In addition to currency and jewelry, 
its applications include electrical contacts (owing to its good electrical conductivity 
and corrosion resistance), dental work, and plating onto other metals for decorative 
purposes. 
Platinum (Pt) is also used in jewelry and is in fact more expensive than gold. It 
is the most important of six precious metals known as the platinum group met- als, 
which consists of Ruthenium (Ru), Rhodium (Rh), Palladium (Pd), Osmium (Os), 
and Iridium (Ir), in addition to Pt. They are clustered in a rectangle in the 
Section 6.4/Superalloys 
155 
 
 
periodic table (Figure 2.1). Osmium, Iridium, and Platinum are all denser than gold 
(Ir is the densest material known, at 22.65 g/cm3). Because the platinum group 
metals are all scarce and very expensive, their applications are generally limited to 
situations in which only small amounts are needed and their unique properties are 
required (e.g., high melting temperatures, corrosion resistance, and catalytic 
characteristics). The applications include thermocouples, electrical contacts, spark 
plugs, corrosion resistant devices, and catalytic pollution control equipment for 
automobiles. 
 
Superalloys 
Superalloys constitute a category that straddles the ferrous and nonferrous metals. 
Some of them are based on iron, whereas others are based on nickel and cobalt. In fact, 
many of the superalloys contain substantial amounts of three or more met- als, 
rather than consisting of one base metal plus alloying elements. Although the tonnage 
of these metals is not significant compared with most of the other metals discussed in 
this chapter, they are nevertheless commercially important because they are very 
expensive; and they are technologically important because of what they can do. 
The superalloys are a group of high-performance alloys designed to meet very 
demanding requirements for strength and resistance to surface degradation (corro- 
sion and oxidation) at high service temperatures. Conventional room temperature 
strength is usually not the important criterion for these metals, and most of them 
possess room temperature strength properties that are good but not outstanding. 
Their high temperature performance is what distinguishes them; tensile strength, 
hot hardness, creep resistance, and corrosion resistance at very elevated tempera- 
tures are the mechanical properties of interest. Operating temperatures are often in 
the vicinity of 1100°C (2000°F). These metals are widely used in gas turbines— jet 
and rocket engines, steam turbines, and nuclear power plants—systems in which 
operating efficiency increases with higher temperatures. 
The superalloys are usually divided into three groups, according to their principal 
constituent: iron, nickel, or cobalt: 
 
➢ Iron-based alloys have iron as the main ingredient, although in some cases the 
iron is less than 50% of the total composition. 
➢ Nickel-based alloys generally have better high temperature strength than alloy 
steels. Nickel is the base metal. The principal alloying elements are chromium 
and cobalt; lesser elements include aluminum, titanium, molybdenum, niobium 
(Nb), and iron. Some familiar names in this group include Inconel, Hastelloy, 
and Rene 41. 
➢ Cobalt-based alloys consist of cobalt (around 40%) and chromium (perhaps 
20%) as their main components. Other alloying elements include nickel, molyb- 
denum, and tungsten. 
 
In virtually all of the superalloys, including those based on iron, strengthening 
is accomplished by precipitation hardening. The iron-based superalloys do not use 
martensite formation for strengthening. Typical compositions and strength prop- 
erties at room temperature and elevated temperature for some of the alloys are 
presented in Table 6.15. 
6.4 
Section 5.4/Measurement of Surfaces 
156 
 
 
 
TABLE • 6.15 Some typical superalloy compositions together with strength properties at room temperature 
and elevated temperature. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Tensile Strength at 
Tensile Strength at 
 
 
 
Chemical Analysis, %a 
 
Room Temperature 
870°C (1600°F) 
Superalloy 
Fe 
Ni 
Co 
Cr 
Mo 
W 
Otherb 
MPa 
lb/in2 
MPa 
lb/in2 
Iron-based 
Incoloy 802 
 
46 
 
32 
 
21 
 
<2 
 
690 
 
100,000 
 
195 
 
28,000 
Haynes 556 
29 
20 
20 
22 
3 
6 
815 
118,000 
330 
48,000 
Nickel-based 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Incoloy 807 
25 
40 
8 
21 
5 
1 
655 
95,000 
220 
32,000 
Inconel 718 
18 
53 
19 
3 
6 
1435 
208,000 
340 
49,000 
Rene 41 
 
55 
11 
19 
1 
5 
1420 
206,000 
620 
90,000 
Hastelloy S 
1 
67 
16 
15 
1 
845 
130,000 
340 
50,000 
Nimonic 75 
3 
76 
20 
<2 
745 
108,000 
150 
22,000 
Cobalt-based 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Stellite 6B 
3 
3 
53 
30 
2 
5 
4 
1010 
146,000 
385 
56,000 
Haynes 188 
L-605 
3 
22 
10 
39 
22 
14 
53 
20 
15 
2 
960 
1005 
139,000 
146,000 
420 
325 
61,000 
47,000 
Compiled from [11] and [12]. 
aCompositions to nearest percent. 
bOther elements include carbon, niobium, titanium, tungsten, manganese, and silicon. 
 
 
 
